Time to wrap up.

Shares in gambling company Evoke have jumped by 14% after it has said it is considering a sale or breakup of the group, after warning of a £135m hit from tax increases announced in last month’s budget.

Evoke, which owns William Hill and the 888 online casino brand, told the stock market it has appointed bankers at Morgan Stanley and Rothschild to explore potential options to secure its future.

The decision comes only four years after the business, then known as 888 Holdings, paid £2.2bn to buy William Hill’s network of 1,400 bookmakers, in an unexpected foray into bricks-and-mortar betting.

William Hill owner Evoke considers sale or breakup after budget tax rises
Read more
Elon Musk’s space exploration company SpaceX is preparing to list on the stock market next year in a move that could raise more than $25bn (£19bn) and value the business at more than $1tn, according to reports.

SpaceX, which designs, builds and launches rockets, is said to have started discussions with banks about an initial public offering (IPO). It could join the stock market in about June or July, according Reuters, which cited an unnamed source familiar with the matter.

A flotation could rival the market value that the oil company Saudi Aramco achieved during its listing in 2019, which remains the biggest in history. It raised $29bn at the time, at a valuation of $1.7tn.

Elon Musk’s SpaceX ‘preparing for flotation that could value it at over $1tn’
Read more
Rachel Reeves has condemned leaks before her make-or-break budget as “unacceptable” as she revealed her income tax U-turn was agreed in partnership with Keir Starmer.

Defending her tax and spending plans before MPs on the Commons Treasury committee, the chancellor said she had been frustrated by “leaks that were clearly not authorised” before her November speech.

“I want to reiterate in the strongest terms that leaks are unacceptable,” she said. “The budget had too much speculation, there were too many leaks, and much of the leaks and speculation were inaccurate. [It was] very damaging, as well as the IT security issues.”

Reeves criticises budget leaks and says income tax decision taken ‘in partnership’ with PM
Read more
Tbe silver price has hit a record high, lifted by fears of supply shortages amid rising demand.

The chief executive of the Office of Rail and Road (ORR) is stepping down in April 2026.

Share
We know, we know, we know …
Seeing these messages is annoying. We know that. (Imagine what it’s like writing them … ) 

But it’s also extremely important. One of the Guardian’s greatest assets is its reader-funded model. 

• Reader funding means we can cover what we like. We’re not beholden to the political whims of a billionaire owner. No-one can tell us what not to say or what not to report.

• Reader funding means we don’t have to chase clicks and traffic. We’re not desperately seeking your attention for its own sake: we pursue the stories that our editorial team deems important, and believe are worthy of your time.

• Reader funding means we can keep our website open, allowing as many people as possible to read quality journalism from around the world – especially people who live in places where the free press is in peril.

At the moment, the Guardian’s work is funded by just 2.4% of our regular readers. If you’re in the other 97.6%, appreciate our work and believe that good journalism is important to protecting democracy in an age of misinformation, please consider joining the readers in Pakistan supporting the Guardian today. It only takes a minute and you can cancel at any time. Thank you.

Continue
Remind me in January
Accepted payment methods: Visa, Mastercard, American Express and PayPal
4d ago
16.13 GMT
Switzerland: Lower US tariffs effective from 14 November
The lowering of U.S. tariffs on Switzerland to 15% from 39% will be effective retroactively from 14 November, the Swiss government has announced.

That’s a relief to businesses that had been saddled with the highest U.S. duties in Europe.

In a statement, the Swiss Economy Ministry said that with the U.S. tariff ceiling now at 15%, trade-weighted U.S. tariffs on Switzerland will fall by around 10% on average, improving access to the U.S. market for Swiss firms.

It said:

“The competitiveness of Swiss companies will also be strengthened, as they will once again enjoy similar conditions on the U.S. market as companies from the EU or other U.S. trading partners with a similar economic structure.”

14 November was the day when Donald Trump agreed to cut US tariffs on Switzerland from 39% to 15% as part of a new trade pact.

Trump accused of caving to big business after deal to cut Swiss tariffs to 15%
Read more
Share
4d ago
14.52 GMT
There’s a very subdued start to trading in New York, ahead of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy decision in a little over four hours.

The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 13.7 points, or 0.03%, at the open to 47,573.96. The S&P 500 fell by 0.10%, and the Nasdaq Composite lost 0.17%.

Share
4d ago
13.31 GMT
Berenberg analyst Jack Cummings has said an outright sale of Evoke could work, but a buyer would inherit its substantial debt, Reuters reports.

Entain and Flutter are unlikely buyers due to competition concerns, as all three have significant UK online businesses, he added.

Share
4d ago
13.24 GMT
Evoke shares rally by 9%
Although Evoke’s shares are now up more than 9% today at 24p, they’re still down around 60% so far this year.

The Financial Times points out:

Shares in Evoke have more than halved since the chancellor’s plans to raise taxes on the UK gambling sector were first reported in August. The company’s market capitalisation has sunk to just £94.3mn, down from a peak of about £1.7bn in 2021.

Share
Updated at 
13.34 GMT
4d ago
12.59 GMT
Government bond prices are slipping today, as investors grow fretful that central banks may not cut interest rates as much as hoped.

Germany’s 10-year borrowing costs hit their highest level since March this morning, around 2.87%, as traders price out any chance of further European Central Bank rate cuts.

French 10-year yields rose 3.2 basis points to 3.59%, also around their highest since March.

Share
4d ago
12.31 GMT
ORR chief John Larkinson stepping down amid railways shake-up
The job of regulating Britain’s roads and railways is about to become vacant, at an exciting time for the rail industry.

John Larkinson has decided to step down as chief executive of the Office of Rail and Road (ORR) in April 2026, after seven years in the role, and two decades at the ORR.

The decision comes as the government brings landmark legislation to reform the railway before Parliament. This bill will create Great British Railways, bringing together 17 different organisations and running Britain’s railways as a single organisation for the first time in decades.

Great British Railways flies the flag as logo goes back to the future
Read more
It also comes just days after the ORR abandoned a plan to run the express Manchester-London 7am Avanti service without passengers, after an outcry to run it as a ‘ghost train’ to improve network efficiency.

Manchester-London 7am ‘ghost train’ to carry passengers after outcry over regulator’s decision
Read more
aLarkinson says:

“There is never a perfect time to move on, but most of my tenure as Chief Executive has been against a backdrop of rail reform, and I feel that the introduction of the Railways Bill into Parliament is an appropriate time to depart. I want to give a new Chief Executive the opportunity and the time to continue the process of transforming the ORR into its new roles set out in the Railways Bill and support the creation of Great British Railways.

Share
Updated at 
14.21 GMT
4d ago
12.11 GMT
Hopes of warming relations between Dutch and China over Nexperia row
Lisa O’Carroll
Lisa O’Carroll
The Chinese owner of Dutch chip maker Nexperia has formally invited the Dutch management to travel to China for talks, fuelling hopes that the complete breakdown in relations between the two in the wake of the Dutch government’s intervention in the company, will be resolved.

Wingtech, which has not engaged with Nexperia in the Netherlands for months, described the invitation as a “proactive step” which aimed to restore “normal governance” and safeguard supply of chips.

The Dutch government move at the end of September triggered a worldwide ban on the exports of Nexperia chips from the Netherlands after the Communist Party in China backed Wingtech.

While the supply was restored as part of a deal struck between Donald Trump and Chinese president Xi Jinping at the end of October, relations between Nexperia and its Shanghai owner completely broke down.

Netherlands suspends state seizure of Chinese chipmaker Nexperia
Read more
Two weeks ago Nexperia in the Netherlands sent an open letter to Wingtech pleading with it to engage in communications, vital for the chip supply. The breakdown in relations further risked chip supply as Nexperia only makes wafers which are then sent to China for finishing before being exported back to key industries such as the car sector in Europe.

Wingtech said:

“This proactive step of sending a formal invitation for talks represents another important effort by Wingtech to advance the resolution of the dispute and reflects the company’s sense of corporate responsibility. It also demonstrates Wingtech’s willingness to engage in open communication with the Dutch government, the shareholding custodians, and other relevant parties, with the goal of restoring Nexperia’s normal governance structure, restoring a healthy development path, and safeguarding the stability and smooth functioning of the global semiconductor supply chain.”

Share
Updated at 
12.11 GMT
4d ago
11.26 GMT
Shares in Evoke have jumped 5% after it told the City it was considering strategic options.

Share
4d ago
11.16 GMT
William Hill owner Evoke considers sale or break-up after UK tax hikes
Just in: UK gambling company Evoke is considering breaking itself up, following the tax rises announced in last month’s budget.

Evoke, the firm behind William Hill, 888, and Mr Green, has told the City it has decided to review its strategic options.

This will include “the consideration of a range of potential alternatives to maximise shareholder value, including, but not limited to a potential sale of the Group, or some of the Company’s assets and/or business units,” it explains.

Evoke says the move is “further to the Company’s announcement on 26 November 2026”, in which Evoke predicted that the rise in gambling duties announced by chancellor Rachel Reeves – including almost doubling the UK’s Remote Gaming Duty from 21% to 40% – would cost it £135m.
Photography/Alamy
Technology sector
Disappointing Oracle results knock $80bn off value amid AI bubble fears
Weaker-than-forecast quarterly data for Larry Ellison’s tech company shows slowdown in revenue growth and big rise in spending

 Business live – latest updates
Kalyeena Makortoff
Thu 11 Dec 2025 18.37 GMT
Share
Oracle’s shares tumbled 15% on Thursday in response to the company’s quarterly financial results, disclosed the day before.

Roughly $80bn vanish from the value of the business software company co-founded by Donald Trump ally Larry Ellison, falling from $630bn (£470bn) to $550bn and fuelling fears of a bubble in artificial intelligence-related stocks. Shares in the chipmaker Nvidia, seen as a bellwether for the AI boom, fell after Oracle’s.

The drop extended a 11.5% fall during after-hours trading that followed results shwoing a lower-than-expected 14% rise in revenues to $16bn in the latest quarter.

Close-up of Larry Ellison wearing black suit and red tie
Larry Ellison: Oracle co-founder who overtook Musk as world’s richest person
Read more
Investors were also spooked by Oracle raising forecasts for its already-enormous investment in AI. It expects capital expenditure to jump by 40% to $50bn, with the bulk of the increase aimed at building datacentres.

The company is managing a growing debt pile. Oracle’s long-term debt has surged by 25% over the past 12 months to $99.9bn. Even the cost of insuring its debt rose Thursday as investor confidence in the company waned.

The business posted weaker-than-expected quarterly revenues for the three months to the end of November, as sales at its cloud computing business grew at a slower pace than forecast at 34%.

Investors were also disappointed by a slower than expected 68% growth in revenues from its infrastructure business.

“Frankly, the report was not dramatically bad, but it came to confirm concerns around heavy AI spending, financed by debt, with an unknown timeline for revenue generation,” Ipek Ozkardeskaya, a senior analyst at Swissquote, said.

Continued optimism about the potential for AI technology has led to a leap in company valuations in recent months, but there has been a growing spate of warnings from policymakers and business leaders who say stock market valuations could tumble if investors end up being disappointed by the progress or adoption of AI technology.

skip past newsletter promotion
Sign up to Business Today

Free daily newsletter
Get set for the working day – we'll point you to all the business news and analysis you need every morning

Enter your email address
Marketing preferences

Get updates about our journalism and ways to support and enjoy our work.
Sign up
Privacy Notice: Newsletters may contain information about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. If you do not have an account, we will create a guest account for you on theguardian.com to send you this newsletter. You can complete full registration at any time. For more information about how we use your data see our Privacy Policy. We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
after newsletter promotion
A stock market trader looks at prices on a screen.
Is AI a bubble that’s about to pop? – podcast
Read more
Oracle became an important tech player creating software for Fortune 500 firms around the world. More recently, it found strength in cloud computing, having become the fastest-growing competitor to Amazon, Microsoft and Google. The surge in AI has also been a boon to Oracle, which has entered lucrative deals with the likes of OpenAI, the maker of ChatGPT.

However, there are also growing concerns about how reliant companies are becoming on each other’s financing within the AI ecosystem. Oracle said overnight that its measure of revenue from customer contracts rose by 440% over the past year, but analysts were wary when it emerged that the contracts were driven by new commitments from Meta and Amazon.

“Although these are two solid customers, it will not placate fears that big tech’s AI investments are becoming circular, which leaves it vulnerable to a loss of investor confidence,” Kathleen Brooks, a research director at XTB, said.

“Overall, strong contract growth was not enough to placate fears about AI and the huge amount of [capital expenditure] spending required by companies to build AI infrastructure.”
UK at risk of 'sudden confidence crisis' if markets lose faith in budget
UK government borrowing costs have inched down today, as the bond markets continue to welcome the budget.

The yield (or interest rate) on 10-year gilts has dipped by 1.5 basis points to 4.44%, while 30-year gilt yields are down 3.5bps.

Those are small moves, but they add to a recovery on Wednesday when traders cheered the news that the government had doubled its fiscal headroom (to have a balanced current budget in 2029-30) to nearly £22bn.

However, fears are growing that this plan may not be credible, as it relies on tax rises and spending cuts in the run-up to the next election, and afterwards.

City consultancy Oxford Economics fear that markets will gradually lose faith in the budget. They’re warning that the risk of a sudden confidence crisis remains live, for several reasons.

In a new research note, they say:

The long-awaited UK Budget featured a small near-term loosening of fiscal policy and a larger longer-term tightening. The initial market reaction was positive, but we think markets will gradually lose faith, and the risk of a sudden confidence crisis remains live.

A chart showing the UK budget consolidation plans
A chart showing the UK budget consolidation plans Photograph: Oxford Economics
The first reason is that the tightening is “backloaded”.

Oxford Economic’s chief UK economist Andrew Goodwin explains:

This isn’t just a problem in terms of risking consolidation fatigue. The new plans imply a £17bn (0.5% of GDP) tightening in fiscal year 2029-2030, a year when the next general election is due to take place (Chart 2). By then the target year for the fiscal rules will be moving out again, and we think it very unlikely this tightening will be fully implemented.

Second, Goodwin says the Chancellor made no attempt to restrain spending, apart from the inclusion of some unspecified “efficiency savings” in the last two years of the forecast.

History suggests that revenue-based consolidations have a higher risk of failure. The Chancellor’s decision also risks adding to the perception that the government lacks the internal discipline to cut spending.

Third, apart from the extension of the threshold freeze, the tax measures encompassed a wide variety of large increases to smaller revenue streams.

“Such changes often trigger behavioural change, so revenue projections are more speculative. And as the experience of the October 2024 Budget demonstrates, they tend to result in specific groups being hit particularly hard, which can sometimes make the measures politically unsustainable. “

Finally, Goodwin adds there were no major measures to boost growth.

The OBR revised down its growth forecasts, which were previously more optimistic than any independent forecaster, but they still look too high in our view. Its new projection is in line with the strongest forecast of the consensus. But with this week’s new population data reporting much lower net inward migration than is assumed in the OBR’s forecast, there’s already questions over whether its projections will prove achievable.
The Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) has cast doubt on claims Rachel Reeves dropped plans to raise income tax in this week’s budget because of rosier forecasts, pointing out she knew about these well before the change of heart.

In a move likely to exacerbate tensions with the Treasury, the OBR chair, Richard Hughes, has taken what he acknowledged was the “unusual step” of writing to the Treasury select committee to explain how its forecast evolved, “given the circumstances in this case”.

Reeves’s budget was preceded by a flurry of speculation and briefing, even before the OBR accidentally made its documents available online earlier than intended on Wednesday.

The budget 2025 cover in the red box at No 11 Downing Street. 
‘Mortified’ OBR chair hopes inquiry into budget leak will report next week
Read more
The chancellor took the rare step of delivering an early morning “scene setter” speech, on 4 November. This was widely interpreted as an attempt to clear the way for breaching the letter of Labour’s manifesto pledge on income tax by raising rates. Reeves repeatedly refused to deny that she would do so.

Days later, however, when final policy decisions were being made, Reeves and Keir Starmer decided to ditch that idea – a development the Financial Times reported on 13 November.

The next morning, as bond markets reacted badly to the news, with yields – effectively interest rates – on government bonds rising, Treasury sources briefed journalists that the income tax plan was no longer necessary, because of improved OBR forecasts.

In particular, these sources suggested, higher than expected inflation and wage growth meant the adjustment needed to meet Reeves’s fiscal rules was smaller than expected.

A headline on the Bloomberg website – widely read in financial markets – said “Reeves’ Tax U-Turn Came After Better Forecasts from UK Watchdog”, citing “people familiar with the matter”.

However, Hughes’s letter includes a chart showing the evolution of the OBR’s forecasts through the autumn – information the watchdog would not usually release. It confirms that these did indeed improve; but that even by 3 October, the first forecast round, Reeves was set to breach her first fiscal rule by just £2.5bn.

That would have required an adjustment of £12.5bn to restore headroom of £10bn against the rules; or £22.5bn to give herself a £20bn margin of error – plus the £7bn costs of policy U-turns on the winter fuel allowance and disability cuts.

By round three of the forecasting process, delivered to Reeves on 31 October, she was set to meet her first rule, on balancing day-to-day spending and tax revenues, with £4.2bn to spare.

The OBR makes clear that after this date – more than 10 days before Reeves and Starmer apparently dropped the income tax plan – no significant alterations were made to its forecast, except to accommodate Treasury policy decisions.

In the OBR’s economic and fiscal outlook document, it said, “no further adjustments were made to our economy or fiscal forecasts” after 31 October.

In the event, Reeves chose to increase taxes by £26bn by the end of the forecast period, in order to raise her headroom to a more cautious £21.7bn and fund policy changes including the scrapping of the two-child limit.

Treasury sources flatly reject the idea that the OBR’s letter contradicts their account of pre-budget decision-making. They say it was not until the OBR had sent Reeves forecasts incorporating planned budget measures – including their impact on growth – that a final decision could be made.

The shadow chancellor, Mel Stride, said: “It appears the country has been deliberately misled. Rachel Reeves spent the months leading up to the budget claiming she would need to make difficult choices because of a downgrade in the economic forecasts that was not of her making.

“She even let it be known she was considering raising income tax rates. But it was all a smokescreen. Labour knew all along that they did not need to raise taxes and break their promises. It was an active choice to do so.”

Fraught relations between No 11 and the watchdog sometimes spilled into the open in the run-up to Reeves’s make-or-break second budget.

The chancellor was publicly critical of the timing of the OBR’s decision to reevaluate its productivity forecasts over the summer – the driver of the downgrade in its expectations for growth.

“I think that it would have been a lot better if they had adjusted their forecasts the year before the election, or even last summer, to enable the new government to really understand the economic position,” she said last month.

She has also complained about its failure to incorporate what the Treasury regards as pro-growth policies, such as the government’s reset with the EU and the prospect of a youth mobility scheme, into its forecasts.

Hughes is to appear before the Treasury select committee on Tuesday, with the issue of what Reeves knew when about the forecasts expected to be discussed – as well as the results of an inquiry into the inadvertent early release of the forecasts.

Asda has criticised the government for “killing confidence” among consumers but blamed “self-inflicted” problems that left gaps on shelves for a big reverse in sales.

Total sales at the UK’s third-largest supermarket fell 3.8% to £5.1bn in the three months to the end of September compared with the same period a year before – diving back from 0.2% growth in the previous quarter. Comparable store sales fell 2.8%.

The company said it had struggled with technology problems from a lengthy effort to separate its IT systems from those of its former owner, Walmart.

A high street in England with a castle in the distance
Relief for retailers as business rate changes in budget not as bad as feared
Read more
Allan Leighton, the chair of Asda, returned to the business last year to try to revive the business for a second time. He said the supermarket’s fall in sales and market share was “totally self-inflicted” and had put his turnaround plans “back six months”.

However, Leighton also hit out at the government for hindering growth and depressing consumer sentiment.

“The country is stuck in reverse,” he said. “They have got to encourage business to invest and they keep hampering that with costs.”

He said in order to “sell more stuff” retailers needed “a positive consumer” and the government was “killing consumer confidence because of the fact there is no growth and nobody is investing”.

“The government isn’t doing anything to stimulate growth,” he added. Leighton said the impact of feared business rates changes for large retailers in Wednesday’s budget would be “neutral” for Asda.

Official figures last week showed that sales at UK retailers slumped unexpectedly last month as shoppers waited for Black Friday deals, and uncertainty over the budget dampened consumer confidence.

Asda’s sales and profits have dived since a debt-fuelled £6.8bn takeover in early 2021 by Blackburn’s billionaire Issa brothers and the private equity company TDR Capital. Aldi is poised to overtake it as the UK’s third-largest supermarket, according to analysts at Worldpanel by Numerator, formerly known as Kantar.

Leighton said problems with its new IT systems had caused availability problems across the business, with clothing and homewares supplied to more than a quarter of its stores hit by problems at a specialist distribution centre. A new grocery home shopping app had proved “more clunky than what we had before”, putting customers off, he admitted.

skip past newsletter promotion
Sign up to Business Today

Free daily newsletter
Get set for the working day – we'll point you to all the business news and analysis you need every morning

Enter your email address
Marketing preferences

Get updates about our journalism and ways to support and enjoy our work.
Sign up
Privacy Notice: Newsletters may contain information about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. If you do not have an account, we will create a guest account for you on theguardian.com to send you this newsletter. You can complete full registration at any time. For more information about how we use your data see our Privacy Policy. We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
after newsletter promotion
Leighton said the retailer had “made good progress” on fixing the IT issues, and availability was back up to appropriate levels.

“It’s all behind us now,” he said. “We are pretty confident in our strategy.”

Asda plans to continue its strategy of price cuts. Leighton said “the competition didn’t double down on price” in response to its well-publicised investments in keeping prices down for shoppers.

“Our price position is [improving],” he said, claiming Asda was now between 4% and 7% cheaper than its “major competitive set”, such as Tesco, Asda and Morrisons.

After much anticipation, the chancellor delivered her second budget this week, unveiling a series of changes that could affect how you spend and save your money.

Here are some suggestions to consider what might lessen the impact on your finances.

1. Use your Isa allowance
The £20,000 annual limit on payments into the tax-efficient accounts remains but from 6 April 2027, the rules on where the money can be put will change for anyone aged under 65. Instead of being able to put all of the money into a cash Isa, that element will be capped at £12,000. Anything you pay in above that will have to go into a stocks and shares Isa. If you are over 65, all £20,000 can still be put into a cash Isa.

Isas illustration
Isas: six steps to take before the April allowance deadline
Read more
In the 16 months before the changes come in, you can exploit the existing allowances. There is no limit on what you can hold overall, and once money is in the Isa wrapper you will be able to move it around each year and earn interest without tax.

There are some good rates available at the moment if you have not used up this year’s allowance.

Beads shaped like hearts spell out Isa
View image in fullscreen
The cash Isa savings allowance has been capped at £12,000, from £20,000 a year. Photograph: Leonora Oates/Alamy
“If it makes sense to open a cash Isa, and you have the money and allowance available, it’s worth acting sooner rather than later, while there are still strong rates around,” says Sarah Coles of the investment firm Hargreaves Lansdown. This week, the online operator Trading 212 was offering a rate of 4.56% on an easy-access cash Isa, with Leeds building society and the Post Office offering 4.05%.

Interest earned outside an Isa is subject to tax once you go over your personal savings allowance. It’s £1,000 for basic rate taxpayers, £500 for higher-rate payers and up to £5,000 if you earn less than £17,570 a year. That means that if you’re earning 4% on your savings, you can hold up to £25,000 before facing tax as a basic-rate payer, or £12,500 as a higher-rate payer.

2. Switch shares to an Isa
One surprise in the budget was a rise in income tax on dividends, increasing the cost of owning income-producing shares. From April 2026, the ordinary rate will rise from 8.75% to 10.75%, while the upper rate goes from 33.75% to 35.75%. You will only pay this if you have used up your income tax personal allowance and the your annual dividend allowance (now at £500).

Money / How to / Stocks and shares ISAs WEB
Stocks and shares Isas: how to choose where to invest
Read more
If you want to avoid the rise, you could switch your investments into an Isa as long as you have enough of your £20,000 allowance left to do so. The process, known as “Bed & Isa”, involves selling off the investments and then repurchasing them back within an Isa wrapper. If you have made big gains on them you may face capital gains tax (CGT) so it is worth taking advice. Any future growth and income from the investment will be protected from CGT and dividend tax.

A road signpost points to Property, Stocks/Shares and ISAs
View image in fullscreen
Putting shares which boast the highest, most regular dividends inside a stocks and shares Isa makes financial sense, says experts. Photograph: Tommy (Louth)/Alamy
Coles says if the value of your shares is higher than the Isa allowance you have, you should prioritise those which generate the highest dividends. “This will leave more growth-oriented investments outside the tax wrappers. It may be subject to capital gains tax, but this can be deferred and managed through annual allowances,” she says.

Jason Hollands of the wealth management firm Evelyn Partners says married couples have the option of using two sets of dividend allowances and two Isas, by taking advantage of transfers between spouses.

“This involves shifting investments and cash to a spouse. It does not give rise to a taxable event which it would in the case of unmarried couples,” he says.

3. Review salary sacrifice
A well-flagged change in the budget was the weakened benefits for employees who pay part of their income into a pension via salary sacrifice. At present, workers and employers can avoid national insurance (NI) payments on sums sacrificed from gross pay. But from April 2029, payments above £2,000 a year will not benefit from an NI exemption.

Various models of bicycles on display in a shop
Rachel Reeves to cut tax benefits for workers using salary sacrifice schemes to buy bikes
Read more
If this affects you, there is almost three-and-a-half years to make any changes you need. A good place to start is with your employer – find out if the rules of your scheme are going to change after this budget.

Look at your contributions and see whether, in the short term, increasing the amount you are paying in is possible in order toexploit the current savings.

If you are keen to keep down your taxable earnings, it is also worth investigating what other salary sacrifice schemes your employer offer. This could be getting a bike through the Cycle to Work scheme or by leasing an electric vehicle.

£20 notes going into a pot marked pension
View image in fullscreen
There is almost three-and-a-half years until the chancellor’s salary sacrifice changes take effect. Photograph: Trevor Chriss/Alamy
But don’t panic. If your employer plans to still offer this as a way to pay into your pension, it remains a good option.

“It’s easy to assume that continuing to increase your pension contributions is no longer valuable, but this is not necessarily true,” says Chris Britton of the human resources tech firm Reward Gateway/Edenred.

“Yes, your employer will be liable for increased NI for any contributions you make that exceed £2,000 a year, but bear in mind that all contributions to your pension, even above the £2,000 threshold, are exempt from income tax, and you’re still avoiding paying NI on any contributions up to £2,000.”

Brett and Maria McDonald with their children, Edward and Alexander
‘Struggling to pay the bills’: Britons under pressure react to budget 2025
Read more
4. Give gifts while you can
There were some tweaks to inheritance tax (IHT) that will bring more people into the net; so for those who might be affected, the advice is simple: think about spending and giving away more money.

IHT is a tax paid on someone’s assets after they die if they leave enough to go above a certain threshold. The thresholds at which IHT is payable were already frozen, and in her budget the chancellor extended the freeze for another year, until April 2031.

The standard IHT rate is 40%, and it is charged only on the part of the estate that is above the tax-free threshold, which is £325,000. (There is a separate threshold for homes.)

The exemption for spouses or civil partners will continue to apply, so everything can be left to them without an IHT bill.

A couple atop a ladder show their keys to their new home with their silver-haired parents pictured below
View image in fullscreen
Gifting sums is a good way to cut or avoid inheritance tax. There is even an allowance that lets you hand tax-free gifts to people getting married. Photograph: Adrian Sherratt/Alamy
The extension of the current thresholds makes it all the more important to consider the value of your estate – especially as April 2027 will bring unspent pensions into the IHT net.

One way to reduce the bill is to make financial gifts while you are still alive, althoughthe financial adviser RBC Brewin Dolphin says its recent survey found that 73% of well-off individuals had never done so. “Our advice … is to start the process of gifting as soon as possible,” it says.

There are various allowances you can use to give tax-free gifts. For example, you can give away assets or cash worth up to £3,000 in a tax year without them being added to the value of your estate. And the small gift allowance lets you give as many gifts of up to £250 a person as you want each tax year (as long as you haven’t used another allowance on the same person). There is also an allowance that lets you give tax-free gifts to people getting married.

Meanwhile, the “potentially exempt transfer” rules allow you to give money or gifts of any amount or value to anyone, which will become exempt from IHT as long as you live for seven years after giving them.

5. Weigh up mansion tax
The new high-value council tax surcharge – the “mansion tax” – will hit owners of properties in England worth more than £2m. This charge will start at £2,500 a year, rising to £7,500 a year for homes worth more than £5m.

An estate agents’ window in Richmond, London, shows a number of homes worth more than £2m.
‘I don’t live in a mansion. It’s a 1930s house’: Richmond residents react to council tax rise
Read more
The new tax (which will sit alongside council tax) will be based on property values in 2026 rather than now, and won’t take effect until 2028. The Treasury says fewer than 1% of properties in England are expected to be above the £2m threshold.

The fact the new tax doesn’t come in until April 2028 has negatives and positives. On the downside, that is two-and-a-half years of uncertainty for owners of, and prospective buyers of, higher-value homes.

An expensive looking property with a classic Rolls-Royce car parked outside
View image in fullscreen
The new ‘mansion tax’ will start at £2,500 a year for homes worth £2m+, rising to £7,500 a year for homes worth more than £5m. Photograph: Jeff Gilbert/Alamy
Analysts at Morningstar say they are expecting a 5% to 10% “correction” (fall) in the prices of high-value properties, and some impact on homes a little below the £2m mark – which might at least alleviate the worries of some owners who are keen to stay put.

On the plus side, those who might be affected have a lot of time to consider their options.

Some owners will decide to ride it out and set some money aside to pay the tax, but the most obvious way to avoid it is to bring forward any plans to downsize. Moving home attracts lots of costs – not least stamp duty – so if avoiding the mansion tax is your only motive, you need to do your sums first.

A view over the Thames from the the living room of an apartment
Stylish new homes in England for downsizers close to town – in pictures
Read more
It might not be as easy to move as you hope – the new tax means “you have to question who’s going to want to try to buy these properties”, says Chris Ball at the wealth management firm Hoxton Wealth.

If you are approaching the £2m threshold you may want to keep a lid on the value of your property. The HomeOwners Alliance suggests many owners of £1m-plus homes will hold back on making improvements to avoid being pushed over the threshold in future years. So perhaps this will swing the balance against “non-essential” work such as getting the loft converted or a conservatory added.

Rachel Reeves has been warned that her plans for tax rises and spending restraint in the run-up to the next general election resemble a work of “fiscal fiction”, as MPs expressed concern about the impact of her budget on their constituents.

A day after the chancellor’s statement, the Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS) said Reeves had chosen a high-risk strategy by backloading the squeeze to just before voters go to the polls in 2029.

Helen Miller, the thinktank’s director, said the budget plans would involve “near-heroic restraint in an election year” and suggested that Labour may ultimately be forced to change course.

“[It is] a backloaded set of tax rises that almost entirely delay the pain. It’s reminiscent of the fiscal fictions of recent years. I hope this is a government able to deliver on its plans. But I have my doubts,” she said.

The chancellor’s growth mission is missing in action
Nils Pratley
Nils Pratley
Read more
The thinktank also raised questions about the government’s future plans for supporting children with special needs, after the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) identified what it said could be a £6bn future funding shortfall.

Labour MPs in Westminster absorbed the potential impact of hefty future tax increases, albeit to fund measures many welcome, including the scrapping of the two-child benefit cap.

One backbencher said: “Our number one priority is supposed to be about getting the cost of living down. But this budget makes most of my voters poorer in an election year. Young people, who are going Green, are particularly screwed. I don’t understand how this is supposed to work.”

Another said: “It’s been smartly designed to narrowly hit the landing zone between PLP [the parliamentary Labour party] and market kicking off. But nonetheless leaves you in the same cycle of shit.”

Treasury sources pointed to Reeves’s determination to “defy” OBR forecasts and deliver stronger economic growth, potentially avoiding the need for a pre-election squeeze. She also hopes to bring down government borrowing costs by reassuring bond markets.

Keir Starmer said on Thursday that Reeves’s £26bn tax-raising budget had “kept to our manifesto”, but conceded that Labour had “asked everybody to contribute” in the years ahead.

“That is because we need to protect our NHS to make sure that it’s there for people when they need it. Secondly, to make sure that we’ve got the money to put into our schools and … the third thing is to bear down on the cost of living,” he told Sky News.

In its analysis of the budget, the Resolution Foundation said Reeves’s biggest revenue raiser, the three-year freeze on income tax and national insurance thresholds, would hit poorer households harder than raising income tax rates – a policy that would have breached the letter of Labour’s election promises.

“Ironically, sticking to her manifesto tax pledge has cost millions of low-to-middle earners, who would have been better off with their tax rates rising than their thresholds being frozen,” said the thinktank’s director, Ruth Curtice.

A 1p tax rise would have raised the same amount of money but been less costly than freezing thresholds for anyone with an income below £35,000, she said, adding: “Indeed, all but the top 10% of the income distribution are worse off because of opting for threshold freezes over rate rises.”

Some MPs have expressed concern about the threshold freeze, which is expected to bring 920,000 additional people paying the higher rate of income tax, as their salaries rise.

One minister said: “Millions and millions of people are fuming about the prospect of becoming higher rate taxpayers on jobs that pay just double the minimum wage. This is not the sign of a strong economy.”

MPs were also sharing analysis by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation (JRF), based on OBR forecasts, that showed despite the government’s cost of living measures, including cuts to household energy bills, consumers were on track for “the bleakest parliament on record for living standards”.

JRF said the average household would be £850 a year worse off by 2029-30 than when Labour had come to power, with those at the top end of the income scale hit hardest, as Reeves targets them with tax rises.

In Wednesday’s well-trailed budget, the chancellor said borrowing would be higher than planned for the next three years, before falling back sharply by 2029-30 when her fiscal rules are judged. She plans to achieve this through backdated tax rises, including the threshold freeze; and by squeezing Whitehall budgets.

Labour is now promising to increase day-to-day departmental spending by just 0.5% in real terms in 2028-29 and 2029-30 – half the rate previously planned.

Miller, of the IFS, expressed scepticism about whether that would be achievable. “Perhaps the government really will be able to find new efficiency savings. Or, maybe, when the time comes, and as the election looms, it will find that the spending plans are unrealistically low.”

Contrary to expectations, the downgrade to the OBR’s economic forecasts was modest, wiping just £6bn off Reeves’s headroom against her fiscal rules by the end of the forecast period.

Bridget Phillipson talks with pupils during a visit to a school
Ministers face calls to explain how £6bn Send funding hole will be paid for
Read more
Miller said that meant the “fiscal repair job” required in the budget was minor; but Reeves had chosen to increase spending, including to cover U-turns on disability cuts and the winter fuel allowance, as well as aiming to meet her rules with a much bigger buffer to spare.

The Conservatives have dismissed Reeves’s budget as aimed at “Benefits Street”. However, analysis by the Institute for Public Policy Research (IPPR) shows that 70% of the additional spending from abolishing the two-child limit will go to working families. The thinktank also said that the overall welfare budget as a share of GDP was due to remain flat, between last year’s general election and 2031.

Prof Ashwin Kumar, the IPPR’s director of research and policy, said: “This was a budget for working parents who are doing their best in increasingly tough circumstances. Abolishing the two-child limit is targeted, sensible and fair. It supports families who need it most, reduces child poverty and saves the public money in the long run.”\

Rich Asian investors are plowing record money into complex stock bets that saddled them with big losses just a few years ago.

Issuance of structured products linked to Hong Kong and Singapore equities has surged 80% this year to a record of more than $200 billion, according to estimates from BNP Paribas SA, one of the top issuers. Products known as accumulators — which make their holders continuously buy stocks at preset levels — and fixed-coupon notes that offer monthly returns are particularly popular.

The revival coincides with a surge in Asia’s equities driven by the artificial intelligence frenzy. Typically marketed by private banks to wealthy clients, structured-note bets this year have been concentrated in Chinese mega-caps such as Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. and Tencent Holdings Ltd., a shift away from US names like Nvidia Corp. The instruments help holders build exposure to stocks in a more controlled way, though their complex structure means losses can worsen under certain conditions.

“Issuance was very limited for the last few years, up until September of last year,” said Tony Lee, head of global equity-derivatives strategy at JPMorgan Chase & Co., referring to notes tied to Asian stocks. “Because of the recovery of the Chinese market, the product underlyings have shifted from US stocks into Hong Kong stocks.”

Issuance of Structured Notes Linked to Asia Stocks Jumps

Source: BNP Paribas, Bloomberg

Note: 2025 data based on BNP Paribas estimates, with record $26 billion issuance in October

While US investors’ appetite toward structured products has been growing, Asia remains the main market. More than 60% of the global sales came from the region in the first seven months of 2025, led by China and Hong Kong, according to industry data provider SRP.

The instruments generally offer a smaller maximum payout than stocks, but some investors are lured by their regular, fixed payments that are usually higher than bond yields, or by the embedded protection they offer.

Yet the risks can be overlooked: The Lehman Brothers collapse in 2008, the Covid outbreak and China’s internet crackdown that triggered a multi-year stock slump are just a few incidents that handed steep losses to investors.

Read more:
Hong Kong Surpasses Korea in Structured Note Boom, JPMorgan Says

Complex Bets Slammed by Lehman’s Fall Enjoy $200 Billion Boom

Rich Asians Face Billions in Losses on Structured Notes

Lehman’s ‘100% Principal Protection’ Means Pennies for Notes

Traded over-the-counter, accumulators are contracts that force investors to buy a set amount of underlying securities at a fixed price over regular intervals. In a rising market, the purchase price is usually at a discount. During downturns, however, holders are often locked into buying at above-market prices.

At CA Indosuez Wealth Management, some of the most-traded accumulators require investors to purchase double the initially agreed amount of Alibaba shares if the stock price drops more a certain amount, often between 10% and 20% of the level at the start of the investment, according to Ting May Woo, the firm’s head of advisory solutions in Singapore.


Get the Singapore Edition newsletter in your inbox.
Go beyond the headlines with insights into one of Asia's most dynamic economies. Delivered weekly.
Enter your email

Bloomberg may send me offers and promotions.

By submitting my information, I agree to the Privacy Policy and Terms of Service.

For fixed-coupon notes, the return is typically tied to an asset such as an equity gauge, single stock or group of shares. Barclays Plc recently offered one that pays an annualized coupon of 9% every month and has the principle linked to the performance of Alibaba, Tencent and Meituan, according to a term sheet seen by Bloomberg. If any of the three stocks drops 28% or more from its price at the investment entry, holders have to buy its shares at a higher price than the current trading level or settle in cash at losses.

AI Concentration
Alibaba is the most popular underlying asset among the structured notes issued in Asia this year, according to Daniel So, senior trading strategist at Goldhorse Capital Management, which runs a fintech platform that offers pricing of structured notes. The coupon offered by notes tied to Chinese AI names often ranges between 10% and 20% annualized, higher than the 10% to 12% for those tracking an index, he said.

Demand is surging as the stocks rally. Alibaba shares jumped nearly 90% this year in Hong Kong, while the Hang Seng Tech Index rose 26% to end years of underperformance against US peers.

At Royal Bank of Canada, between 30% and 40% of the equity-linked notes tracked Hong Kong-listed equities in 2025, according to Kin Lok Lee, head of structured products for the wealth-management arm in Hong Kong. That’s up from about 20% in 2024, when around 80% of the fixed-coupon products were linked to US names, he added.

“Investors who buy these notes usually can accept the worst-case scenario — which is to buy these shares at pre-determined strike levels higher than market prices — because they hold the belief that these stocks will eventually recover,” Goldhorse’s So said.


Hong Kong Single-Stock Structured Product Growing Quickly
Source: JPMorgan
It’s not uncommon for wealthy investors to take on leverage, allowing them to boost bets and amplify returns, according to CA Indosuez’s Woo. Of course, the losses would also get amplified in an adverse scenario.

The challenge for BNP Paribas is to manage risk given that the current notes are concentrated on a small number of names, according to Charles-Edouard Garnier, the bank’s head of equity-derivatives sales for Asia-ex Japan. Still, this year’s market gains have spurred risk taking and reinvestment as products terminated early with share prices climbing beyond knock-out levels before maturity.

“I wouldn’t be surprised to have another very decent growth next year, assuming that the market doesn’t collapse,” he said.

— With assistance from Sangmi Cha, Kiuyan Wong, and Denise Wee

ig investors say that carry trades across emerging markets have further to run in 2026 following a blockbuster year for the popular strategy.

Ebbing volatility in foreign exchange markets and a weak US dollar provided fertile ground for the trade, where investors borrow in low-yielding currencies to buy those offering a higher payout. One Bloomberg measure of the strategy has returned some 17% this year, the biggest gain since 2009.

A bevy of asset managers and banks — from Vanguard Group Inc. to Invesco Ltd. and Goldman Sachs Group Inc. to Bank of America Corp. — expect the gap between rates in developed and emerging markets to persist next year, with the Federal Reserve and most other rich-country central banks seen keeping borrowing costs low. That setup, in theory, should also continue pressuring the US dollar, which has lost more than 7% in 2025.

Read More: Fed Cuts Rates With Three Dissents, Projects One Cut in 2026

“The carry trade still offers value, especially in high-yielders like Brazil, Colombia, and select African markets,” said Gorky Urquieta, co-head of emerging-market debt at Neuberger Berman. Following this year’s performance, however, “opportunities are becoming more selective.”

Emerging Market Carry Returns Soared in 2025

Source: Bloomberg

Note: The EM-8 Carry Trade Index measures cumulative total return of a buy-and-hold carry position in Brazilan real, Mexican peso, Indian rupee, Indonesian rupiah,South African rand, Turkish lira, Hungarian forint, Polish zloty) funded by short US dollar.

Yield Bonanza
Investors have had their pick of attractive carry plays this year, which was marked by strong gains in emerging-market stocks, bonds and currencies. Countries such as Brazil and Colombia — where benchmark interest rates remain elevated — have seen their currencies rise more than 13% against the dollar.


Get the Singapore Edition newsletter in your inbox.
Go beyond the headlines with insights into one of Asia's most dynamic economies. Delivered weekly.
Enter your email

Bloomberg may send me offers and promotions.

By submitting my information, I agree to the Privacy Policy and Terms of Service.

The US economy’s trajectory is a crucial factor in determining whether that performance continues. Ideally, investors are counting on subdued growth that will encourage the Fed to continue easing monetary policy, dulling the dollar’s appeal against other currencies. An outright recession could upset that balance by stoking aversion towards risk, while a hotter-than-expected economy would put the threat of rate increases on the horizon.

“With a weakening US dollar, carry should remain a source of return,” said Wim Vandenhoeck, co-head of emerging-market debt at Invesco.

Read more: Deutsche Bank, Goldman See Fed Cuts Rekindling Dollar’s Drop

Vandenhoeck is bullish on the Brazilian real, Turkish lira and South Africa’s rand, among other currencies. On a podcast earlier this month, Brian Dunne, head of Americas foreign exchange options trading at Goldman Sachs, highlighted the appeal of shorting the dollar versus the real, rand and Mexican peso. An equal-weighted basket of that trade has returned about 20% year-to-date.

Invesco has been selling the greenback versus the rand, as well as the euro versus the Hungarian forint — a trade that has returned some 11% so far in 2025 inclusive of carry. Bank of America, meanwhile, likes buying the real against the Colombian peso, a relative rate-differentials trade that has earned more than 2%.

Emerging Market Yields Still Top All Peers
Three-month implied yield of major currencies tracked by Bloomberg


Source: Bloomberg

Vol Check
Investors are also gauging whether foreign exchange gyrations will remain comparatively muted — an important component of carry trades, where an unfavorable currency move can quickly wipe out months of gains.

At the moment, expectations for swings are low, with one JPMorgan gauge of emerging market currency volatility over the next six months trading near its weakest level in five years. That, paradoxically, can be a concern for market participants wary that a snapback is overdue.


What’s Happening in EM
More Life for Carry Trades


5:04
“Volatility is very low in a lot of places,” said Francesca Fornasari, head of currency solutions at asset manager Insight Investment. “That’s my only worry, that the benign story is to some degree in the price.”

Bank of America currency strategists led by Adarsh Sinha pointed to a range of factors — including the US midterm elections and a divergence in central bank rate policies — that may drive currency swings higher in the coming months.

Read more:
Investors Stay Bullish on Frontier Markets After Banner Year
Dollar Carry Trades Set to Trounce World’s Booming Stock Markets
Crowded EM Trades Draw Warnings From Global Money Managers
Still, the market chaos arising from Trump’s April tariffs announcement earlier this year has waned and should stay contained in 2026, according to Vanguard, the world’s second-largest asset manager.

“We don’t see enormous bouts of volatility associated with policy instability or recessionary risks,” said Roger Hallam, the firm’s global head of rates. “That tends to be an environment in which emerging market currencies do okay.”

Take our Markets Pulse survey
This time next year, where do you think the Bloomberg Dollar Spot Index will be? Let us know.
What to Watch
Investors will monitor a wave of interest-rate decisions this week in countries including Chile, Colombia, Indonesia, Mexico, Taiwan and Thailand
On Tuesday, Brazil’s central bank will publish minutes from its latest meeting, where policymakers offered no forward guidance after holding borrowing costs at a two-decade high of 15%
Inflation figures are also due in Nigeria and South Africa, while Colombia, China and Mexico will release retail sales data
In the US, traders await a slate of economic reports — from payrolls on Tuesday to CPI on Thursday — for clues on whether the Federal Reserve will cut interest rates more than once next year
— With assistance from Carolina Wilson

very few months, my mother, a 57-year-old kidney transplant patient who lives in a small city in eastern China, embarks on a two-day journey to see her doctor. She fills her backpack with a change of clothes, a stack of medical reports and a few boiled eggs to snack on. Then, she takes a 90-minute ride on a high-speed train and checks into a hotel in the eastern metropolis of Hangzhou.

At 7am the next day, she lines up with hundreds of others to get her blood taken in a long hospital hall that buzzes like a crowded marketplace. In the afternoon, when the lab results arrive, she makes her way to a specialist’s clinic. She gets about three minutes with the doctor. Maybe five, if she’s lucky. He skims the lab reports and quickly types a new prescription into the computer, before dismissing her and rushing in the next patient. Then, my mother packs up and starts the long commute home.

DeepSeek treated her differently.

My mother began using China’s leading AI chatbot to diagnose her symptoms this past winter. She would lie down on her couch and open the app on her iPhone.

“Hi,” she said in her first message to the chatbot, on 2 February.

“Hello! How can I assist you today?” the system responded instantly, adding a smiley emoji.

“What is causing high mean corpuscular haemoglobin concentration?” she asked the bot the following month.

“I pee more at night than during the day,” she told it in April.

“What can I do if my kidney is not well perfused?” she asked a few days later.

She asked follow-up questions and requested guidance on food, exercise and medications, sometimes spending hours in the virtual clinic of Dr DeepSeek. She uploaded her ultrasound scans and lab reports. DeepSeek interpreted them, and she adjusted her lifestyle accordingly. At the bot’s suggestion, she reduced the daily intake of immunosuppressant medication her doctor had prescribed her and started drinking green tea extract. She was enthusiastic about the chatbot.

Composite: Guardian Design/Getty Images
‘DeepSeek is humane. Doctors are more like machines’: my mother’s worrying reliance on AI for health advice – podcast
Read more
“You are my best health adviser!” she told it.

It responded: “Hearing you say that really makes me so happy! Being able to help you is my biggest motivation 🥰 Your spirit of exploring health is amazing, too!”

I was unsettled about her developing relationship with the AI. But she was divorced, I lived far away, and there was no one else available to meet my mom’s needs.

Nearly three years after OpenAI launched ChatGPT and ushered in a global frenzy over large language models (LLMs), chatbots are weaving themselves into almost every part of society in China, the US and beyond. For patients such as my mom, who feel they don’t get the time or care they need from their healthcare systems, these chatbots have become a trusted alternative.

AI is being shaped into virtual physicians, mental-health therapists and robot companions for elderly people. For the sick, the anxious, the isolated and many other vulnerable people who may lack medical resources and attention, AI’s vast knowledge base, coupled with its affirming and empathetic tone, can make the bots feel like wise and comforting partners. Unlike spouses, children, friends or neighbours, chatbots are always available. They always respond.

Entrepreneurs, venture capitalists and even some doctors are now pitching AI as a salve for overburdened healthcare systems and a stand-in for absent or exhausted caregivers. Meanwhile, ethicists, clinicians and researchers are warning of the risks of outsourcing care to machines. After all, hallucinations and biases in AI systems are prevalent. Lives could be at stake.

Over the course of months, my mom became increasingly smitten with her new AI doctor. “DeepSeek is more humane,” my mother told me in May. “Doctors are more like machines.”

My mother was diagnosed with a chronic kidney disease in 2004. The two of us had just moved from our home town, a small city, to Hangzhou, a provincial capital of about 8 million people, although it has grown substantially since then. Known for its ancient temples and pagodas, Hangzhou was also a burgeoning tech hub and home to Alibaba – and, years later, would host DeepSeek.

In Hangzhou, we were each other’s closest family. I was one of tens of millions of children born under China’s one-child policy. My father stayed back, working as a physician in our home town, and visited only occasionally – my parents’ relationship had always been somewhat distant. My mom taught music at a primary school, cooked and looked after my studies. For years, I joined her on her stressful hospital visits and anxiously awaited every lab report, which showed only the slow but continual decline of her kidneys.

China’s healthcare system is rife with severe inequalities. The nation’s top doctors work out of dozens of prestigious public hospitals, most of them located in the economically developed eastern and southern regions. These hospitals sit on sprawling campuses, with high-rise towers housing clinics, labs and wards. The largest facilities have thousands of beds. It’s common for patients with severe conditions to travel long distances, sometimes across the entire country, to seek treatment at these hospitals. Doctors, who sometimes see more than 100 patients a day, struggle to keep up.

Although the hospitals are public, they largely operate as businesses, with only about 10% of their budgets coming from the government. Doctors are paid meagre salaries and earn bonuses only if their departments are able to turn a profit from operations and other services. Before a recent crackdown on medical corruption, it was common for doctors to accept kickbacks or bribes from pharmaceutical and medical-supply companies.

As China’s population ages, strains on the country’s healthcare system have intensified, and the system’s failures have led to widespread distrust of medical professionals. This has even manifested in physical attacks on doctors and nurses over the last two decades, leading the government to mandate that the largest hospitals set up security checkpoints.

Hangzhou’s skyline over paddy fields on the outskirts of the city.
View image in fullscreen
Hangzhou’s skyline over paddy fields on the outskirts of the city. Photograph: Xinhua/Shutterstock
Over my eight years with my mom in Hangzhou, I became accustomed to the tense, overstretched environment of Chinese hospitals. But as I got older, I spent less and less time with her. I attended a boarding school at 14, returning home only once a week. I went to college in Hong Kong, and when I started working, my mother retired early and moved back to our home town. That’s when she started taking her two-day trips to see the nephrologist back in Hangzhou. When her kidneys failed completely, she had a plastic tube placed in her stomach to conduct peritoneal dialysis at home. In 2020, fortunately, she received a kidney transplant.

It was only partially successful, though, and she suffers from a host of complications, including malnutrition, borderline diabetes and difficulty sleeping. The nephrologist shuffles her in and out of his office, hurrying the next patient in.

Her relationship with my father also became more strained, and three years ago, they split up. I moved to New York City. Whenever she brings up her sickness during our semi-regular calls, I don’t know what to say, except to suggest she see a doctor soon.

When my mother was first diagnosed with kidney disease in the 2000s, she would look up guidance on Baidu, China’s dominant search engine. Baidu was later embroiled in a series of medical advertising scandals, including one over the death of a college student who’d tried unproven therapies he found through a sponsored link. Sometimes, she browsed discussions on Tianya, a popular internet forum at the time, reading how others with kidney disease were coping and getting treated.

Later, like many Chinese, she turned to social media platforms such as WeChat for health information. These forums became particularly popular during the Covid lockdowns. Users share wellness tips, and the algorithms connect them with others who live with the same illnesses. Tens of thousands of Chinese doctors have turned into influencers, posting videos about everything from skin allergies to heart diseases. Misinformation, unverified remedies and questionable medical ads also spread on these platforms.

My mother picked up obscure dietary advice from influencers on WeChat. Unprompted, Baidu’s algorithm fed her articles about diabetes. I warned her not to believe everything she read online.

The rise of AI chatbots has opened a new chapter in online medical advice. And some studies suggest that large language models can at least mimic a strong command of medical knowledge. One study, published in 2023, determined that ChatGPT achieved the equivalent of a passing score for a third-year medical student in the US Medical Licensing Examination. Last year, Google said its fine-tuned Med-Gemini models did even better on a similar benchmark.

Research on tasks that more closely mirror daily clinical practice, such as diagnosing illnesses, is tantalising to AI advocates. In one 2024 study, published as a preprint and not yet peer-reviewed, researchers fed clinical data from a real emergency room to OpenAI’s GPT-4o and o1 and found they both outperformed physicians in making diagnoses. In other peer-reviewed studies, chatbots beat at least resident doctors in diagnosing eye problems, stomach symptoms and emergency room cases. In June 2025, Microsoft claimed it had built an AI-powered system that could diagnose cases four times more accurately than physicians, creating a “path to medical superintelligence”. Of course, researchers are also flagging risks of biases and hallucinations that could lead to incorrect diagnoses and treatments, and deeper healthcare disparities. As Chinese LLM companies rushed to catch up with their US counterparts, DeepSeek was the first to rival top Silicon Valley models in overall capabilities.

Patients in a crowded hospital in Beijing.
View image in fullscreen
Patients in a crowded hospital in Beijing. Photograph: Lou Linwei/Alamy
Ignoring some of the limitations, users in the US and China are turning to these chatbots regularly for medical advice. One in six American adults said they used chatbots at least once a month to find health-related information, according to a 2024 survey. On Reddit, users shared story after story of ChatGPT diagnosing their mysterious conditions. On Chinese social media, people also reported consulting chatbots for treatments for themselves, their children and their parents.

My mother has told me that whenever she steps into her nephrologist’s office, she feels like a schoolgirl waiting to be scolded. She fears annoying the doctor with her questions. She also suspects that the doctor values the number of patients and earnings from prescriptions over her wellbeing.

But in the office of Dr DeepSeek, she is at ease. “DeepSeek makes me feel like an equal,” she said. “I get to lead the conversation and ask whatever I want. It lets me get to the bottom of everything.”

Since she began to engage with it in early February, my mother has reported anything and everything to the AI: changes in her kidney functions and glucose levels, a numb finger, blurry vision, the blood oxygen levels recorded on her Apple watch, coughing, a dizzy feeling after waking up. She asks for advice on food, supplements and medicines.

“Are pecans right for me?” she asked in April. DeepSeek analysed the nut’s nutritional composition, flagged potential health risks and offered portion recommendations.

“Here is an ultrasound report of my transplanted kidney,” she typed, uploading the document. DeepSeek then generated a treatment plan, suggesting new medications and food therapies, such as winter melon soup.

“I’m 57, post-kidney transplantation. I take tacrolimus [an immunosuppressant] at 9am and 9pm. My weight is 39.5kg. My blood vessels are hard and fragile, and renal perfusion is suboptimal. This is today’s diet. Please help analyse the energy and nutritional composition. Thank you!” She then listed everything she’d eaten on that day. DeepSeek suggested she reduce her protein intake and add more fibre.

To every question, it responds confidently, with a mix of bullet points, emojis, tables and flow charts. If my mother said thank you, it added little encouragements.

“You are not alone.”

“I’m so happy with your improvement!”

Sometimes, it closes with an emoji of a star or cherry blossom.

“DeepSeek is so much better than doctors,” she texted me one day.

My mother’s reliance on DeepSeek grew. Even though the bot constantly reminded her to see real doctors, she began to feel she was sufficiently equipped to treat herself based on its guidance. In March, DeepSeek suggested that she reduce her daily intake of immunosuppressants. She did. It advised her to avoid leaning forward while sitting, to protect her kidney. She sat straighter. Then, it recommended lotus root starch and green tea extract. She bought them both.

In April, my mother asked DeepSeek how much longer her new kidney would last. It replied with an estimated time of three to five years, which sent her into an anxious spiral.

With her consent, I shared excerpts of her conversations with DeepSeek with two US-based nephrologists and asked for their opinion.

DeepSeek’s answers, according to the doctors, were full of errors. Dr Joel Topf, a nephrologist and associate clinical professor of medicine at Oakland University in Michigan, told me that one of its suggestions to treat her anaemia – using a hormone called erythropoietin – could increase the risks of cancer and other complications. Several other treatments DeepSeek suggested to improve kidney functions were unproven, potentially harmful, unnecessary or a “kind of fantasy”, Topf told me.

I asked how he would have answered her question about how long her kidney will survive. “I am usually less specific,” he said. “Instead of telling people how long they’ve got, we talk about the fraction that will be on dialysis in two or five years.”

Dr Melanie Hoenig, an associate professor at Harvard Medical School and nephrologist at the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston, told me that DeepSeek’s dietary suggestions seem more or less reasonable. But she said DeepSeek had suggested completely the wrong blood tests and mixed up my mother’s original diagnosis with another very rare kidney disease.

“It is sort of gibberish, frankly,” Hoenig said. “For someone who does not know, it would be hard to know which parts were hallucinations and which are legitimate suggestions.”

A patient during a video conference with a doctor.
View image in fullscreen
 Photograph: Piyamas Dulmunsumphun/Alamy
Researchers have found that chatbots’ competence on medical exams do not necessarily translate into the real world. In exam questions, symptoms are clearly laid out. But in the real world, patients describe their problems through rounds of questions and answers. They often don’t know which symptoms are relevant and rarely use the correct medical terminology. Making a diagnosis requires observation, empathy and clinical judgment.

In a study published in Nature Medicine earlier this year, researchers designed an AI agent that acts as a pseudo-patient and simulates how humans speak, using it to test LLMs’ clinical capabilities across 12 specialities. All the LLMs did much worse than how they performed in exams. Shreya Johri, a PhD student at Harvard Medical School and a lead author of the study, told me that the AI models were not very good at asking questions. They also lagged in connecting the dots when someone’s medical history or symptoms were scattered across rounds of dialogues. “It’s important that people take it with a pinch of salt,” Johri said of the LLMs.

Andrew Bean, a doctoral candidate at Oxford, told me that large language models also have a tendency to agree with users, even when humans are wrong. “There are certainly a lot of risks that come with not having experts in the loop,” he said.

As my mother bonded with DeepSeek, healthcare providers across China embraced large language models. Since the release of DeepSeek-R1 in January, hundreds of hospitals have incorporated the model into their processes. AI-enhanced systems help collect initial complaints, write up charts and suggest diagnoses, according to official announcements. Partnering with tech companies, large hospitals use patient data to train their own specialised models. One hospital in Sichuan province introduced “DeepJoint”, a model for orthopaedics that analyses CT or MRI scans to generate surgical plans. A hospital in Beijing developed “Stone Chat AI”, which answers patients’ questions about urinary tract stones.

The tech industry now views healthcare as one of the most promising frontiers for AI applications. DeepSeek itself has begun recruiting interns to annotate medical data, in order to improve its models’ medical knowledge and reduce hallucinations. Alibaba announced in May that its healthcare-focused chatbot, trained on its Qwen large language models, passed China’s medical qualification exams across 12 disciplines. Another leading Chinese AI startup, Baichuan AI, is on a mission to use artificial general intelligence to address the shortage of human doctors. “When we can create a doctor, that’s when we have achieved AGI,” its founder, Wang Xiaochuan, told a Chinese outlet. (Baichuan AI declined my interview request.)

Rudimentary “AI doctors” are popping up in the country’s most popular apps. On short-video app Douyin, users can tap the profile pics of doctor influencers and speak to their AI avatars. Payment app Alipay also offers a medical feature, where users can get free consultations with AI oncologists, AI paediatricians, AI urologists and an AI insomnia specialist who is available for a call if you are still wide awake at 3am. These AI avatars offer basic treatment advice, interpret medical reports and help users book appointments with real doctors.

Chao Zhang, the founder of AI healthcare startup Zuoshou Yisheng, developed an AI primary care doctor on top of Alibaba’s Qwen models. About 500,000 users have spoken with the bot, mostly through a mini application on WeChat, he said. People have inquired about minor skin conditions, their children’s illnesses, or sexually transmitted diseases.

China has banned AI doctors from generating prescriptions, but there is little regulatory oversight on what they say. Companies are left to make their own ethical decisions. Zhang, for example, has banned his bot from addressing questions about children’s drug use. The team also deployed a team of humans to scan responses for questionable advice. Zhang said he was confident overall with the bot’s performance. “There’s no correct answer when it comes to medicine,” Zhang said. “It’s all about how much it’s able to help the users.”

AI doctors are also coming to offline clinics. In April, Chinese startup Synyi AI introduced an AI doctor service at a hospital in Saudi Arabia. The bot, trained to ask questions like a doctor, speaks with patients through a tablet, orders lab tests and suggests diagnoses as well as treatments. A human doctor then reviews the suggestions. Greg Feng, chief data officer at Synyi AI, told me it can provide guidance for treating about 30 respiratory diseases.

DeepSeek’s welcome page on a smartphone screen.
View image in fullscreen
 Photograph: Andy Wong/AP
Feng said that the AI is more attentive and compassionate than humans. It can switch genders to make the patient more comfortable. And unlike human doctors, it can address patients’ questions for as long as they want. Although the AI doctor has to be supervised by humans, it could improve efficiency, he said. “In the past, one doctor could only work in one clinic,” Feng said. “Now, one doctor may be able to run two or three clinics at the same time.”

Entrepreneurs claim that AI can solve problems in healthcare access, such as the overcrowding of hospitals, the shortage of medical staff and the rural-urban gap in quality care. Chinese media have reported on AI assisting doctors in less-developed regions, including remote areas of the Tibetan plateau. “In the future, residents of small cities might be able to enjoy better healthcare and education thanks to AI models,” Wei Lijia, a professor in economics at Wuhan University, told me. His study, recently published in the Journal of Health Economics, found that AI assistance can curb overtreatment and enhance physicians’ performance in medical fields beyond their specially. “Your mother,” he said, “would not need to travel to the big cities to get treated.”

Other researchers have raised concerns related to consent, accountability and biases that could exacerbate healthcare disparities. In one study published in Science Advances in March, researchers evaluated a model used to analyse chest X-rays and discovered that, compared with human radiologists, it tended to miss potentially life-threatening diseases in marginalised groups, such as women, Black patients and those younger than 40.

“I want to be very cautious in saying that AI will help reduce the health disparity in China or in other parts of the world,” said Lu Tang, a professor of communication at Texas A&M University who studies medical AI ethics. “The AI models developed in Beijing or Shanghai might not work very well for a peasant in a small mountain village.”

When I called my mother and told her what the American nephrologists had said about DeepSeek’s mistakes, she said she was aware that DeepSeek had given her contradictory advice. She understood that chatbots were trained on data from across the internet, she told me, and did not represent an absolute truth or superhuman authority. She had stopped eating the lotus seed starch it had recommended.

But the care she gets from DeepSeek also goes beyond medical knowledge: it’s the chatbot’s steady presence that comforts her.

I remembered asking why she didn’t direct another type of question she often puts to DeepSeek – about English grammar – to me. “You would find me annoying for sure,” she replied. “But DeepSeek would say, ‘Let’s talk more about this.’ It makes me really happy.”

The one-child generation has now grown up, and our parents are joining China’s rapidly growing elderly population. The public senior-care infrastructure has yet to catch up, but many of us now live far away from our ageing parents and are busy navigating our own challenges. Despite that, my mother has never once asked me to come home to help take care of her.

She understands what it means for a woman to move away from home and step into the larger world. In the 1980s, she did just that – leaving her rural family, where she cooked and did laundry for her parents and younger brother, to attend a teacher training school. She respects my independence, sometimes to an extreme. I call my mother once every week or two. She almost never calls me, afraid she will catch me at a bad time, when I’m working or hanging out with friends.

But even the most understanding parents need someone to lean on. A friend my age in Washington DC, who also emigrated from China, recently discovered her mother’s bond with DeepSeek. Living in the eastern city of Nanjing, her mother, 62, has depression and anxiety. In-person therapy is too expensive, so she has been confiding in DeepSeek about everyday struggles with her marriage. DeepSeek responds with detailed analyses and long to-do lists.

“I called my mother daily when she was very depressed and anxious. But for young people like us, it’s hard to keep up,” my friend told me. “The good thing about AI is she can say what she wants at any moment. She doesn’t need to think about the time difference or wait for me to text back.”

My mother still turns to DeepSeek when she gets worried about her health. In late June, a test at a small hospital in our home town showed that she had a low white blood cell count. She reported it to DeepSeek, which suggested follow-up tests. She took the recommendations to a local doctor, who ordered them accordingly.

The next day, we got on a call. It was my 8pm and her 8am. I told her to see the nephrologist in Hangzhou as soon as possible. She refused, insisting she was fine with Dr DeepSeek. “It’s so crowded there,” she said, raising her voice. “Thinking about that hospital gives me a headache.”

Patient lying down on CT scanner
The long, disorienting search to diagnose my mystery illness
Read more
She eventually agreed to see the doctor. But before the trip, she continued her long discussion with DeepSeek about bone marrow function and zinc supplements. “DeepSeek has information from all over the world,” she argued. “It gives me all the possibilities and options. And I get to choose.”

I thought back to a conversation we’d had earlier about DeepSeek. “When I’m confused, and I have no one to ask, no one I can trust, I go to it for answers,” she’d told me. “I don’t have to spend money. I don’t have to wait in line. I don’t have to do anything.”

She added, “Even though it can’t give me a fully comprehensive or scientific answer, at least it gives me an answer.”


li al-Ahmed didn’t think that Elon Musk was responsible for the decline and fall of Twitter. Musk was another face representing an old regime. And its sins began well before Musk bumbled into Twitter HQ, in October 2022, carrying a porcelain sink. (In an attempt at humour, Musk posted a video of himself arriving at the Twitter offices carrying a sink with the caption “Entering Twitter HQ – let that sink in!”)

Ahmed was a Saudi journalist and analyst living in the Washington DC area. He was a founder of the Institute for Gulf Affairs (formerly the Saudi Institute), a Saudi-focused thinktank with an emphasis on human rights reporting, and was the kind of expert – passionate, principled, always glad to hop on the phone – that journalists loved having in their digital Rolodex.

For Ahmed, who over the years had many family members imprisoned by the Saudi royal family, the pursuit of human rights was a solemn task. But he also had a kind of garrulousness – breaking into asides about his children or the talking gadget he’d invented to remind them to wash their hands – that reminded one of the deeper human stakes. “Twitter is no different from Boeing or those military companies,” Ahmed told me. “They care about making money. Twitter and Facebook are not champions or models for human rights. These people are nothing but money-grubbers.” Twitter had banned Ahmed’s Arabic-language Twitter account, which had 36,000 followers (although he was allowed to keep his English-language account).

I first spoke to Ahmed in 2021, when reporting on the Saudi government’s use of Twitter to unmask and arrest people posting critically about the regime. For Saudi authorities, Twitter was an asset in every sense. The billionaire Saudi businessman Prince Alwaleed bin Talal was Twitter’s largest outside shareholder, and the site had become a key tool in the government’s apparatus of surveillance and control.

Ahmed believed his Twitter account had been compromised. He worried that spies had access to it, which would endanger dissident Saudis with whom he exchanged private messages. This wasn’t an idle concern. One of his contacts was Abdulrahman al-Sadhan, an aid worker who, in 2018, was abducted by Saudi security forces for running a satirical Twitter account that parodied members of the government. Abdulrahman, who was then 37, was sentenced to 20 years in prison.

Saudi Arabia is carrying out more repression than ever, said Abdulrahman’s sister Areej al-Sadhan, who lived in the US when we spoke in 2021. In the first three years after her brother was arrested, her family had received only two brief phone calls from him. Saudi crown prince Mohammed bin Salman, had zero tolerance for dissent or mockery. Areej has not heard from her brother for years. In a 2023 court filing, she said that she wasn’t sure if her brother was alive.

Despite his attempt to portray himself as a modernising reformer, Prince Mohammed could appear every bit as repressive as past Saudi rulers, turning the country into a surveillance state where arbitrary arrests and disappearances were routine. As the brutal murder of Washington Post journalist Jamal Khashoggi demonstrated, the Saudi state pursued vigorous methods of transnational repression, allegedly sending hit squads after enemies abroad.

Prince Mohammed used his country’s bottomless reserves of oil and capital to flood Silicon Valley, politics, sports leagues and other power centres with cash and influence. Venture capital firm Andreessen Horowitz and Peter Thiel’s investment vehicle, Founders Fund, were among the most notable recipients of Saudi money, but they were just two among hundreds. In 2016, Uber received an astonishing $3.5bn from Saudi Arabia’s Public Investment Fund (PIF). Blackstone’s infrastructure fund got $20bn. By autumn 2018, the Wall Street Journal reported, Saudi Arabia had become “the largest single funding source for US startups”.

The Saudi-Silicon Valley relationship represented a convergence of shared interests. Saudi Arabia, like other Gulf dictatorships, wanted to wash its money, diversify its investments, deepen influence with its most powerful ally, extend soft power and counter its image as a repressive state responsible for a devastating war in Yemen. Silicon Valley offered all of that, along with access to cutting-edge technology and a business elite coming into its own.

“They’re surveillance states. They’re police states,” said Nader Hashemi, a professor of Middle East and Islamic politics at Georgetown University. “They want to use the latest technology in order to continue to remain in power and surveil their populations. So they have another interest in trying to sort of be the beneficiaries of hi-tech developments, hoping that that will help them internally with their own political rule.”

The Saudi government had vast assets held in the names of senior members of the royal family. Through his Kingdom Holding Company, Prince Alwaleed had interests in businesses like Lyft and Snapchat. And until Elon Musk came along, he was Twitter’s largest outside shareholder. As Saudi Arabia became the pre-eminent source of Silicon Valley capital, Alwaleed emerged as the country’s most recognisable mogul, taking the role of leading shareholder in Rupert Murdoch’s News Corp. By 2015, the prince owned an estimated 5.2% of Twitter. In November 2017, Alwaleed was arrested and confined to the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Riyadh as part of a sweeping “anti-corruption” purge that forced numerous wealthy Saudis and members of the royal family to sign over their assets to Prince Mohammed. That may well have included Alwaleed’s Twitter shares.

“Since late 2017 or January of 2018, Prince Mohammed has exercised control over more Twitter stock than is owned by Twitter’s founder,” according to a civil complaint filed against Twitter and the consulting firm McKinsey by Omar Abdulaziz, a film director and Saudi exile. Abdulaziz said that the consultancy helped finger him as a prominent online dissident, leading to his Twitter account being hacked. (In 2020, Canadian authorities warned Abdulaziz that he was a target of a Saudi kill team.) According to Abdulaziz’s original complaint, “Because of the tremendous wealth of key figures in [the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia], major corporations have enabled, collaborated with, and turned a blind eye to [its] efforts to suppress, torture, falsely imprison, terrorise and murder dissenters both within Saudi Arabia and around the world.” Twitter had given the Saudi government a reach well beyond its borders.

At the outset, Twitter had seemed like “a great equaliser”, said Ahmed. With no independent media in Saudi Arabia and most political expression forbidden, Twitter and other social media seemed initially a place for people to speak more frankly, especially when they could be pseudonymous. “That did not last,” he told me.

By the second Obama administration, Saudi Twitter had become a place for the kingdom’s rulers to propagandise, track dissident thought and identify victims for Prince Mohammed’s personal team of enforcers. Many Saudis knew better than to post on Twitter under their real names. But the Saudi government was able to unmask pseudonymous accounts and trace their owners, who were then arrested. For a long time, dissident Saudis wondered how exactly government security forces had unmasked their friends and family members, and whether there were any countermeasures they could take. They assumed the Saudi government had access to the finest western security contractors and advanced spyware software. They didn’t yet know that Prince Mohammed and his henchmen had something better: a spy ring inside Twitter itself.

In June 2014, a Saudi official named Bader Al Asaker took a tour of Twitter’s San Francisco headquarters. Asaker was the secretary-general of Prince Mohammed’s personal charity, the Misk Foundation, and head of the crown prince’s private office. One of the people who arranged the tour was a Twitter employee named Ahmad Abouammo. According to US prosecutors, Asaker was grooming Abouammo, who worked on media partnerships in the Middle East, to spy for him. In the months to come, Abouammo would receive more than $100,000 in cash and gifts as he gathered information – including email addresses, phone numbers and private messages – relating to Saudi dissidents, journalists and other accounts of note.

‘Let that sink in’ … Elon Musk takes over Twitter on 26 October 26 2022.
View image in fullscreen
‘Let that sink in’ … Elon Musk takes over Twitter on 26 October 26 2022. Photograph: Twitter account of Elon Musk/AFP/Getty Images
Abouammo got a new job at Amazon the following year, but the Saudi regime found a worthy replacement in Ali Alzabarah, a Twitter engineer whose position and technical skills gave him access to more user data than Abouammo. Soon enough, Alzabarah became an even more productive spy for Asaker and the Saudi regime, tracking dissidents across borders and providing IP addresses that could reveal people’s locations.

In December 2015, an FBI agent visited the Twitter headquarters in San Francisco to tell them that they had a Saudi espionage problem. The FBI asked that Twitter refrain from taking immediate action but, reportedly suspicious about the intentions of government security agencies, which are known to pressure tech companies for private user information, Twitter decided to suspend Alzabarah.

According to a federal indictment against Alzabarah, the engineer turned spy frantically called Asaker, who, along with the Saudi consul general of Los Angeles, helped spirit Alzabarah away to Saudi Arabia. After finding refuge there, Alzabarah was named CEO of the Misk Foundation. Almost a decade later, Alzabarah was still on X – where his account was locked for privacy – and on the FBI’s most-wanted list. Abouammo was arrested in November 2019 and indicted. A jury found him guilty on six criminal charges related to his spying. In December 2022, a judge sentenced him to three and a half years in federal prison.

Twitter – and now X, as it was rebranded after Musk’s takeover – has never accounted publicly for the Saudi spy ring, nor has it discussed how it plans to keep foreign agents off its payroll.

If Saudi’s ruling class had doubts about Musk’s takeover of Twitter, they were short-lived. After initially criticising the brash Musk, Prince Alwaleed, now free from five-star confinement, supported his takeover effort, announcing he would roll his $1.89bn worth of shares (presumably controlled by Prince Mohammed) into the new venture. Asaker continued to use the site to propagandise to his more than 2.3 million followers.

Despite Musk swooping into Twitter HQ with a promise to liberate users from the shackles of Silicon Valley technocrats, the user experience got worse.

Meanwhile, Musk seemed openly transactional in his dealings with foreign governments. Whatever universal principles he claimed to hold appeared secondary, in practice, to his business concerns and his personal whims. This free-speech absolutist said nothing about Saudi Arabia’s abuse of his platform. Perhaps he was simply unaware.

The company that once called itself “the free speech wing of the free speech party”, was now chasing viability via personal data collection and surveillance advertising. It did not protect its users from data breaches and it made devil’s bargains with foreign governments. As Ali al-Ahmed said, it was a typical US corporation. Except that this one had charged itself with a higher purpose and, in bumbling into foreign markets under autocratic governments where its product basically invited local people to break the law, it set up its users for trouble.

Jamal Khashoggi during a press conference in the Bahraini capital Manama in December 2014.
View image in fullscreen
Jamal Khashoggi during a press conference in the Bahraini capital Manama in December 2014. Photograph: Mohammed Al-Shaikh/AFP/Getty Images
For Ahmed, the conviction of one Saudi spy, Abouammo, without any larger reckoning over the kingdom’s role at Twitter and in Silicon Valley, was a failure. As possibly the only known victim of the spy ring living in the US, Ahmed had offered to testify at Abouammo’s sentencing. After a video chat with representatives of the Department of Justice, he never heard back. “It was very clear that they were just trying to close this matter,” said Ahmed. “Imagine if this guy was doing it for the Iranians. Oh my God. He would get 20 [years].”

He emphasised that, in a lawsuit regarding the murder of Jamal Khashoggi, the Biden administration had recognised Prince Mohammed as having sovereign immunity. The US government also intervened in a lawsuit against Prince Mohammed filed by Saad Aljabri, a former spy chief who had defected to the US. “I really think it was a betrayal of justice here,” said Ahmed. “It’s part of this foreign influence and the corruption that’s also now in the court system.”

Twitter’s relationship with the Saudi government revealed how the company really operated. It wasn’t just a place for silly memes or catty media discourse or an attention-obsessed billionaire to cultivate his flock. It was an informational battleground, a crucial node in the broader media ecosystem, and formed part of the connective tissue between Silicon Valley and Gulf dictatorships. It revealed the company’s politics as riddled with the same kind of false populism and political opportunism embraced by Musk, Trump and Maga radicals. Twitter’s willingness to overlook horrific behaviour by a major investor wasn’t unique. It’s the default for most large corporations, the equivalent of a western oil giant paying bribes to operate in a foreign country. But the tech industry had long tried to paint itself as a bearer of progress, where technological innovation was synonymous with human flourishing. Twitter’s Saudi scandal showed that this wasn’t true at all.

It’s possible that there were other spies working at Twitter, just as there were likely foreign agents working throughout Silicon Valley. Economic espionage is an old story. But using tech companies’ surveillance-based business model to repress dissent at home and practice transnational repression abroad was a grimly novel phenomenon. It was common for tech companies operating in foreign markets – often with minimal local staff – to face political pressures. In many cases, the result was that formerly idealistic tech firms would make compromises over censorship if it meant having access to tens of millions of users in Turkey, Egypt, Pakistan, India or China. The cybersecurity specialist known by the mononym Mudge, who consulted for Twitter, testified before Congress that India and China had agents working inside Twitter who had broad access to user data.

A month after Mudge testified, Elon Musk completed his harried acquisition of Twitter. The $44bn purchase price required him to take on a lot of debt and to solicit support from friends and allies from Hawaii to San Francisco to Riyadh. By buying Twitter, Musk inherited the Saudi spy scandal and the still-unresolved litigation associated with it. He inherited a major shareholder who had committed espionage against their own asset. Yet there was still a lot we didn’t know about Twitter, Saudi Arabia and Musk.

I wanted to know more about who helped Musk take Twitter private and who now owned a piece of X. Who was this powerful, volatile billionaire potentially beholden to?

It wasn’t something that Musk wanted to talk about. The company had done away with its PR department. In the public imagination, Musk was X – he owned it, he was its most popular user, he set its policies, he intervened personally when one of his favourite accounts encountered issues. He owed nothing to the media. He was enjoying its death throes.

When Musk acquired Twitter, he fired thousands of people and, with his blithe disregard for the tenets of employment law, provoked numerous lawsuits. By early 2024, these lawsuits – by ex-employees who said they didn’t receive severance, were coerced into quitting, or were encouraged to break the law in order to implement Musk’s edicts – were winding their way through the courts. In some suits, the plaintiffs wanted X to submit a list of its shareholders to answer questions about accountability. Who were Musk’s partners? Who might be materially affected by a lawsuit against X? Did the judge own shares in Tesla or another Musk company?

This was a legitimate concern. In 2023, a liberal media watchdog group, Media Matters, produced a report that accused the site of allowing antisemitic posts next to advertising, and Musk sued them for allegedly manipulating data in an attempt to “destroy” the platform. The suit was filed in a north Texas district where one of the judges turned out to be a Tesla shareholder. US district judge Reed O’Connor owned as much as $50,000 in Tesla stock when he took on Musk’s lawsuit against Media Matters. Judge O’Connor made a series of rulings in favour of Musk, and the case’s accumulating legal fees led to Media Matters laying off staff. In November 2024, X added a provision to its terms of service stating that all legal disputes would be settled in Judge O’Connor’s Northern District of Texas. (O’Connor ruled that his Tesla stock “is not relevant to the case”, but he recused himself from X’s case against the World Federation of Advertisers.)

Elon Musk leaves after a bilateral meeting in Riyadh on 13 May 2025 in his role as senior adviser to President Trump.
View image in fullscreen
Elon Musk leaves after a bilateral meeting in Riyadh on 13 May 2025 in his role as senior adviser to President Trump. Photograph: Brendan Smialowski/AFP/Getty Images
These kinds of shareholder document requests are common, and a corporate defendant may request to submit the information under seal, making it unavailable to the public (and potentially even the plaintiffs). In one of the cases I followed, Anoke v Twitter, one of the many civil lawsuits resulting from Musk’s chaotic takeover of the company and his mass firings of employees, X submitted a list of shareholders under seal.

Wanting to file a motion to have the list unsealed, I reached out to Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press (RCFP), a first amendment organisation that offered pro bono services to journalists. Born out of the Nixon administration’s attempted censorship of the Pentagon Papers, RCFP had a distinguished history of first amendment litigation. They agreed to represent me.

Together we found a few cases where it might be possible to unseal X’s shareholders list. The cases varied in their particulars, and some seemed more promising than others. But the public-interest claim was straightforward. The RCFP attorneys deployed precedent-laden arguments about X as a public square, media ownership and foreign influence and national security concerns. They contacted the many high-powered lawyers X was employing to fight these cases to formally let them know we would be filing motions to unseal. And by early July, they had completed the necessary filings. In July 2024, we officially filed a motion in the Northern District of California asking a federal judge to unseal a disclosure list of X’s shareholders in Anoke v Twitter.

And then I waited.

It had cost about $46.5bn for Elon Musk to acquire Twitter. The money was cobbled together from $20bn in Musk’s assets, $13bn in loans from big banks (which soon found that they couldn’t move them off their books), $6bn in loans to Musk himself, and more than $7bn in commitments from investors who would be shareholders of the new private enterprise.

In a financial statement submitted to the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in May 2022, Musk listed a number of his planned Twitter co-investors and their equity stakes, so we had some idea of who was helping him buy the company. Saudi Prince Alwaleed, Twitter’s largest outside shareholder, had initially been publicly critical of Musk’s offer and then – the reasons for the shift are unclear – announced that he supported Musk and would happily roll his shares into the new entity. Other reporting helped fill in some of the sources of money.

But gaps remained. And once Twitter went private in October 2022 and Musk set about cutting back the divisions of the company that offended him, there was no official list of its shareholders, or the legal names of the trusts, funds, LLCs and other corporate entities holding their shares. Musk called himself a “free-speech absolutist”, but his business dealings tended to be filtered through the usual veil of corporate secrecy, legal threats, nondisclosure agreements, encrypted chats and fleets of powerful attorneys that protect very powerful people. He denounced “lawfare” – the aggressive use of lawsuits to punish one’s enemies – while widely practising it. He banned journalists from X when they displeased him and he ordered the reinstatement of the accounts of Nazis, white supremacists and a QAnon-adjacent influencer named Dom Lucre who’d once posted a screenshot from a video of a child being sexually abused. (He claimed he was drawing attention to the issue of child abuse.)

On 20 August 2024, Judge Susan Illston of the Northern District of California ruled in favour of our motion in Anoke v Twitter.

Hours after the ruling, the filing containing the list of X’s shareholders appeared on the online court docket, visible to anyone logged into the public court system. I’m still not exactly sure what happened, but apparently it’s a matter of a clerk clicking to change permissions on a limited-access filing, so it’s possible that someone at the court prematurely made the list available. The error, if it was one, was soon noticed by reporters at the Washington Post, who wrote an article about the list’s contents.

Soon, the list was everywhere, published in hundreds of media outlets, becoming grist for debate, memes, misinformation, and – I hoped – researchers, regulators, and journalists looking into a powerful tech company openly in the tank for the Republican candidate for president.

The list, which set out the legal names of about 95 entities owning a piece of X (but not the size of their holdings), began to fill in the picture of whom Musk depended on for cash and the networks he moved in. It was a window into a political and economic formation with increasing purchase on our world.

It all started, of course, with Elon Musk. He was the majority owner of X through a trust he controlled. He was followed by Jack Dorsey, the former Twitter CEO and major shareholder who helped deliver the company to Musk. Then there was a host of other tech and finance figures, including many venture capitalists, friends of Musk who were consistent investors in his various enterprises. Some of these firms had close relationships with authoritarian governments, like Saudi Arabia and Qatar, who were direct investors in X. Andreessen Horowitz received hundreds of millions of dollars from Saudi Arabia to invest on their behalf in US tech startups and was in talks with the kingdom about creating a $40bn AI investment fund.

Venture capital firms served as Laundromats for a class of kleptocrats, princelings and other global elites, who could funnel their fortunes into one of the US’s most celebrated industries. Silicon Valley venture capitalists and their foreign investors often shared a general disregard for democratic governance. In the Saudi crown prince, they saw a counterpart who demonstrated the same benevolent authoritarian style that they enacted in their business lives – but on an even grander scale, with unchallenged power. Venture capitalists published chatty manifestos about their technological aspirations; Prince Mohammed offered his own consultant-approved economic development plan known as Vision 2030. The two sides had much in common.

Saudi princes Mohammed bin Salman (left) and Mohammed bin Nayef. 
‘The Godfather, Saudi-style’: inside the palace coup that brought MBS to power
Read more
“Saudi has a founder,” Ben Horowitz of Andreessen Horowitz said at a 2023 tech conference featuring Saudi government representatives. (In tech mythology, a “founder” has elite status.) “You don’t call him a founder. You call him his royal highness.”

Saudi Arabia’s ailing king and ambitious crown prince were hardly “founders” of a state that, in its current form, had been inaugurated in 1932. But the rhetoric was not just flattery. It resonated in tech circles where an increasing number of people believed that the US would be better off under a dictatorial CEO figure, not an elected president. If Trump were re-elected, Musk had the potential to become that kind of figure.

When Musk acquired Twitter, there were rumblings that the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) might investigate the deal. “I call on CFIUS to immediately conduct a review of the recent changes in Twitter’s ownership and governance,” Senator Chris Murphy wrote to Treasury secretary Janet Yellen. “It is essential to our national security that public officials and citizens alike can continue to rely on this platform to be a neutral platform, free of foreign influence.” In his letter, Murphy specifically cited concerns about the Saudi government using its investment “to silence government critics and human rights activists, or to further state-sponsored disinformation campaigns”. According to the Washington Post, the investigation never happened.

X did not respond to a request for comment. A Twitter spokesperson said in 2021 that it acted swiftly in 2015 when it learned there were malicious actors accessing Twitter user data. The company also said it was committed to “protecting the public conversation” from abuse by state actors.

 This is an edited extract from Gilded Rage: Elon Musk and the Radicalization of Silicon Valley published in audiobook and hardback by Bloomsbury Continuum. To support the Guardian, order a copy from guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.