								NEWS 01

Four men arrested after armed robbery of shop
Police have arrested four men after an armed robbery at a shop in Derbyshire.

Officers were called at 11:56 GMT on Wednesday to reports a shop in Church Road, New Mills, had been robbed by two men armed with a knife and firearm, Derbyshire Police said.

Maddy's Store confirmed in a post on social media that its team was safe after the robbery and thanked people for their concern and understanding.

Firearms officers attended the shop, before information from the public led them to a property in New Street, where they arrested three men in their 40s and one man in his 50s on suspicion of robbery.

The force said a property in Jubilee Street was being searched, which was linked to one of the suspects.

Police said officers were not looking for anyone else in connection with the robbery and there was "no wider risk to the public".

It added there would be an increased police presence in the area on Thursday while the property in New Street was searched.

The Maddy's Store post said the shop would remain closed on Thursday, adding "we appreciate your patience and understanding during this time".

								NEWS 02

Man attacked with hammer by masked robber
A man was assaulted with a hammer by a masked robber during a late-night attack in York city centre, police said.

The suspect, who was riding a bike, approached the victim on Lowther Street, between the junctions with Brownlow Street and Eldon Street, on Sunday 23 November between 00:05 and 00:20 GMT.

The victim had his wallet stolen and suffered bruising and swelling, North Yorkshire Police said.

The suspect is described as a man, about 5ft10in, who was wearing a balaclava or ski mask, police said. Anyone with information is urged to contact the force.

								NEWS 03

Men posing as India's central bank officials pull off $800,000 heist
Armed men posing as officials from India's central bank have robbed a vehicle transporting 70m rupees ($800,000; £600,000) in the southern state of Karnataka, police say.

A massive operation has been launched to find the men who robbed the van in the heart of Bengaluru city in daylight.

The robbery occurred on Wednesday afternoon. Six men in an SUV stopped a cash transport van on a busy road as it was moving money between bank branches, Bengaluru police commissioner Seemant Kumar Singh told the BBC.

The van was carrying a driver, a cash custodian and two armed security guards.
Mr Singh says the robbers told the people in the van that they were officials from the Reserve Bank of India and needed to verify if they had the correct documents to transport such a huge amount of money.

The gang told the cash custodian and guards to leave their weapons in the van and get into the SUV, while the driver was instructed to continue driving with the cash, police said.

The SUV followed the cash van for a few kilometres before the gang forced the driver out of the van, made the cash custodian and guards get out of the SUV, transferred the cash at gunpoint, and fled.

The area had little CCTV coverage, and police are investigating if the gang used multiple vehicles in the operation.

The cash transportation service company has filed a police complaint.

The SUV used in the heist had a fake number plate and a sticker that read "Government of India", a police official told the BBC on condition of anonymity.

The official added that police were also investigating if the company employees had anything to do with the heist.

								NEWS 04

Arrest after worker hurt in jewellery shop robbery
A man has been arrested in connection with a robbery at a jewellers in which a member of staff was injured.

Two men tried to steal items from Saleem Jewellers in Roundhay Road, Leeds, on Monday afternoon, but fled empty handed when police arrived.

West Yorkshire Police a 40-year-old man was arrested on suspicion of robbery in the Birstall area on Tuesday night.

The force said the second man remained outstanding as well as a third male suspect, who is believed to have driven off from the premises in a grey Mazda car.

								NEWS 05
Lexington police investigates bank robbery
LEXINGTON, Ky. (FOX 56) — The Lexington Police Department is investigating a bank robbery that occurred on Saturday afternoon.

Around 12:15 p.m. on Dec. 13, officers were called to a Chase Bank on the 1800 block of Alysheba Way after a reported robbery.
ccording to police, a man allegedly walked into the bank and handed employees a note demanding money. The man then ran from the bank on foot with an undisclosed amount of cash.

Officials described the man as Black, around 5 feet and 7 inches tall, and wearing a black hoodie and black pants.

								NEWS o6

How the Louvre museum robbery happened in video, photographs and maps

Thieves made off with priceless Napoleonic jewels during a spectacular daylight heist on Sunday at the Louvre, the world’s most-visited museum.

The museum in Paris, whose extensive collections include the Mona Lisa, was closed for a second day on Monday as police hunted for the suspects in the robbery, which has reignited a row over a lack of security in France’s museums.

How did thieves break in?
In a highly professional raid, four balaclava-wearing thieves pulled up outside the Louvre on a road along the Seine River. At about 9.30am – half an hour after visitors began entering via the front of the museum – the robbers positioned themselves at the south side of the building and used a vehicle-mounted extendable ladder to reach the second-floor balcony window.
Two of the thieves broke in through the window using an angle grinder and other power tools, gaining access to the museum’s Apollo gallery.
What was stolen, and what was left behind?
Officials said eight pieces were stolen:

A necklace and a pair of earrings originally given by Napoleon I to his second wife, Empress Marie-Louise.

A diadem (similar to a tiara), brooch and decorative bow belonging to Napoleon III’s third wife, Empress Eugénie. The diadem is dotted with nearly 2,000 diamonds.

A tiara, necklace and single earring from a sapphire set worn by – among others – Marie-Amelie, the last queen of France. The necklace is adorned with eight sapphires and 631 diamonds.

The thieves dropped Empress Eugénie’s hugely valuable crown on their way out. It is covered in 1,354 diamonds and 56 emeralds, according to the museum’s website.

What happened after the theft?
As alarms rang out in the museum, alerting guards, the robbers quickly left, escaping on motorbikes and leaving behind some of the equipment used in the raid. The gang tried to set fire to the vehicle before they left but they were prevented by a member of museum staff.

The robbery was completed in seven minutes, sources and officials told Agence France-Presse.

The museum announced it was closing and visitors filed out.

								NEWS 07

Man jailed over murder captured on doorbell camera
A man has been handed a life sentence after murdering a father in a stabbing.

Kane Kotwica, 39, stabbed Matthew Cainey to death in an attack at a block of flats in Gloucester on 28 May which was captured on a doorbell camera.

Kotwica was found guilty of the 53-year-old's murder following a trial at Bristol Crown Court. The jury cleared him of the attempted murders of Jamie Bullock and Luke Lambert in the same incident, but found him guilty of wounding both men.

Sentencing him for life with a minimum term of 31 years earlier, Judge William Hart described the murder as "deliberate and cold-blooded". Judge Hart said Kotwica had "lost his temper and self control" after Mr Cainey likely threw a punch at him and missed.

"You pulled out that knife, and you thrust it intentionally into his chest.

"He was unarmed and he was no threat to you.

"I have no choice but to conclude you are a very dangerous man indeed," he added.

								NEWS 08

Bondi Beach shooting live: 11 killed in Sydney attack at Jewish event
A mass shooting at Bondi Beach in the Australian city of Sydney has killed at least 11 people and wounded 29, including two police officers, police say.
One man believed to be one of the shooters has also been killed, while a second alleged shooter is in critical condition. Authorities designate the shooting a “terrorist” incident, saying it was “designed to target Sydney’s Jewish community on the first day of Hanukkah”.
Jonas Gahr Stoere, Norway’s prime minister: “I am shocked by the horrific attack at Bondi Beach, Australia, during a Jewish Hanukkah event.”

Giorgia Meloni, Italy’s prime minister: “In firmly condemning once again any form of violence and antisemitism, Italy expresses its sorrow for the victims, stands in solidarity with their relatives, the injured and the Jewish communities, and renews its friendship towards the Australian people.”

Jose Manuel Albares, Spain’s foreign minister: “Horrified by the terrorist attack in Australia against the Jewish community. My solidarity with the victims and their loved ones, with the people and government of Australia. Hate, antisemitism, and violence have no place in our societies.”

Helen McEntee, Ireland’s foreign minister: “I want to express my shock and horror at the antisemitic attack on a Jewish community celebrating first day of Hanukkah. … All my thoughts are with the victims and their loved ones and the people of Australia.”

Qatar Ministry of Foreign Affairs: “Qatar renews its position condemning violence, terrorism and criminality whatever the motives.”

								NEWS 09
Man charged with murder after restaurant stabbing
A man has been charged with murder after a stabbing outside a restaurant.

Hertfordshire Police was called to reports of an argument between two men at the Vu Lounge on Bushey High Street at about 23:30 GMT on Saturday.

Afterwards a man in his 30s was taken to hospital with serious injuries where he later died.

Dequain Williams, 25, of Sancroft Close in north-west London, was previously charged with attempted murder, which was later changed to murder.

He will appear at St Albans Crown Court on 5 December.

A woman in her 30s was arrested on suspicion of assisting an offender but remains released on bail while inquiries continue, police added.

Det Insp Lee Martin said: "My thoughts are with the man's family and friends at this tragic time.

"Our investigation is moving at pace and a man has been charged with murder and remanded into custody.

"We believe this is an isolated incident and there is no risk to the wider public."

								NEWS 10

Man charged with attempted murder over shooting
A man has been charged with attempted murder following a shooting in Huddersfield.

The incident, in Smiths Avenue, Marsh, left a man in his 30s seriously injured after he was shot in the leg and shoulder on 1 December. He has since been discharged from hospital.

On Sunday, a police spokesperson said 19-year-old Nathaniel Collins, of St Paul's Road, Bradford, was charged with one count of attempted murder and remanded into custody ahead of his appearance at Bradford Magistrates' Court on Monday.

Three other men arrested on suspicion of assisting an offender have been released on bail, the spokesperson added.

								NEWS 11
Two arrested for murder of cousin in Karachi
KARACHI: Police arrested two suspects on Tuesday for allegedly murdering their 22-year-old cousin over a personal dispute in Karachi.

According to officials, the body of the victim, Tehzeer — a resident of Federal B Area — was found dumped in the bushes near the Super Highway.

After the investigation, police took the victim’s two cousins into custody. The arrested suspects, Arshad and Basharat, confessed to their involvement.

Investigations revealed that a week ago, a heated argument had occurred between Tehzeer and another cousin, Waseem.

The suspects lured Tehzeer out under the pretense of an outing. While returning from Sea View, he was shot and killed in the car near Liaquatabad Bridge. Waseem allegedly fired the fatal shot while Tehzeer was seated in the back seat.

All three cousins — Waseem, Arshad, and Basharat — were allegedly involved in planning and executing the murder, police said.

After the killing, the suspects dumped Tehzeer’s body in the bushes off the Super Highway. Police said that efforts are underway to arrest the third suspect, Waseem, who remains at large.

								NEWS 12
Relative arrested in minor girl's rape, murder in Liaquatabad
KARACHI: A close relative has been arrested in connection with the rape and murder of an 8-year-old girl in Karachi’s Liaquatabad area, ARY News reported on Monday.

The body of the minor girl was found tied with a rope in a drain in Liaquatabad B Area. The suspect has been identified as Fayyaz, and the victim was last seen with him.

Police obtained CCTV footage showing the victim going with the suspect. Police also collected the DNA of the suspect, and further investigation is going on.

The girl had gone missing on April 15 from Sikandar Goth, located on the Super Highway and her body was retrieved the next day. Rescue officials stated that the girl’s hands were tied with a rope when her body was recovered.

Her body was shifted to Abbasi Shaheed Hospital where post-mortem examination report confirmed that she had been raped. A First Information Report (FIR) was registered at the Sachal police station.

Read More: Body of missing eight-year-old girl found near Liaquatabad nullah

Earlier, the body of seven-year-old Sarim, who had been missing for 11 days in mysterious manner, was found from an underground water tank near his residence in North Karachi.

The water tank’s lid was covered with a carton, the police said and added they were now investigating whether the boy fell into the tank accidentally or was pushed.

The child’s body was shifted to the hospital.

Sarim’s family had filed a missing person’s report, fearing abduction, after he failed to return from a nearby madrasa on January 7.

The Karachi police remained clueless and kept searching for the boy who went missing from the North Karachi area.


								NEWS 13

Couple arrested for torturing child maid to death in Lahore
LAHORE: A man and his wife have been arrested for brutally torturing their child maid to death in Hanjarwal area of Ittefaq town, Lahore, ARY News reported on Saturday.

Police have registered a murder case against the accused, Farrukh Butt and Nosheen Butt.

The victim, 10-year-old Sonia, had been working at their residence for the past three months, earning a meagre salary of Rs8,000 per month. She was found dead at the couple’s home, where she had been employed as a domestic worker.

According to the FIR, the couple brutally beat her with batons and sticks, causing severe injuries. Despite her critical condition, the employers didn’t take her to the hospital, resulting in her death at the house.

Sonia’s family claimed that her body bore visible torture marks on her face and all over her body, suggesting prolonged abuse.



Read More: 16-year-old maid was sexually abused before being killed

Earlier, a 16-year-old domestic worker was found dead in a bungalow in the vicinity of Darakhshan Police Station.

According to the statement of the house owner, he went out for lunch, and upon returning home, he discovered that the girl, named Faria, had committed suicide by hanging herself from the ceiling fan.

However, the initial autopsy report of the victim found evidence of rape.

Sources close to the development disclosed that the initial post-mortem report of the girl indicates evidence of rape, with the cause of death attributed to strangulation.

The police officials expressed doubt over the incident of alleged suicide, stating that the girl had worked in the same house for the past year.

								NEWS 14

Two men arrested for murder of young entrepreneur in Lakki Marwat
LAKKI MARWAT: Police have arrested two suspects in connection with the murder of a young entrepreneur in Lakki Marwat, ARY News reported on Friday.

The police reported that the murder took place around five months ago, with the motive being to steal millions of rupees from Shoaib Khan’s online business.

Shoaib Khan’s business involved earning dollars through digital currency and mobile apps, accumulating millions of rupees in his account.

On October 25, 2024, Shoaib Khan’s mother filed a report about his sudden disappearance.

Police have arrested two suspects, Muhammad Ilyas and Aftab, and have recovered the murder weapon, cash, and the victim’s phone from their possession.

According to SP Murad Khan Wazir, the accused killed Khan and buried his body in Wanda Katana. The body was recovered after the suspects led the police to the burial site, and further investigation is ongoing.

Read More: Prime suspect arrested in Karachi crypto trader kidnapping case

Earlier, the specialised unit of Karachi police arrested the prime suspect in a case pertaining to a cryptocurrency trader’s short-term kidnapping, ARY News, citing officials.

According to Karachi police, the prime suspect, identified as Ali Raza, has been arrested in the case.

Raza has become the ninth suspect to have been arrested in the case.

The case stems from the short-term kidnapping of a crypto trader who was robbed off around US$340,000.

								NEWS 15

Sara Sharif's father, stepmother found guilty of her murder

LONDON: In a major development in the 10-year-old Sara Sharif murder case, the jurors found all three accused including her father, stepmother, and uncle guilty on Wednesday.

The jury of nine women and three men declared the father Urfan Sharif and stepmother Beinsh Batool guilty of their daughter’s murder while Uncle Faisal Malik was found guilty of causing or allowing the murder of his niece.

High Court Judge Justice Cavanagh said the sentences for all three culprits will be announced on Tuesday next week. The judge called the case “very stressful and traumatic”.

The 41-year-old Urfan Sharif, 29-year-old Beinsh Batool, and 28-year-old uncle of Sara Sharif had been indicted following their return to the UK from Pakistan.

Read more: Sara Sharif murder: Father, other accused arrested on return to UK

The three accused were arrested upon their arrival in London. All were charged with her murder and causing or allowing the death of a child.

However, the trio initially denied the murder accusations against them but during the cross-examination, they accepted the responsibility for the child’s death. The court indicted them with charges of causing or allowing the death of Sara Sharif.

								NEWS 16
Robbers murder three-month-old during robbery
DEPALPUR: A spine-chilling incident was reported from Punjab where armed robbers murdered a mere 3-month-old child during the robbery, ARY News reported on Friday.

According to the police officials, the incident took place in Depalpur, the largest district of Pakistan’s Punjab province, where the armed culprits tried to rob a motorbike-riding couple.

The police officials disclosed that the robbers when faced resistance from the couple, struck the back of the pistol on the head of the three-month-old child.

The police after filing a case initiated the investigation into the case to arrest the culprits involved in the incident.


								NEWS 17

Court finds mum guilty of murdering 3 daughters
Lauren Dickason was accused of strangling and suffocating her twins Maya and Karla, aged two, and first daughter Liane, six, while her husband was out to dinner with colleagues, according to local media reports.

Dickason admitted killing the girls, but had argued a defence of insanity and infanticide.
Under New Zealand law, infanticide is a defence for a mother who causes the death of her child when, “at the time of the offence, the balance of her mind was disturbed”.

The girls were killed at their home in the South Island city of Timaru soon after the family arrived in New Zealand from South Africa.

A jury at Christchurch High Court found Lauren Dickason guilty of all three charges of murder.

As the verdict was handed down, Lauren Dickason’s lawyer looked on in shock.

In New Zealand, murder carries a prison sentence of at least 10 years.

Following the verdict, Detective Inspector Scott Anderson said in a statement that police extended their “sympathies to the families who will never get to see Liane, Maya, and Karla grow up”.

“Words cannot begin to express the tragic circumstances of this investigation,” he added.

During an emotional trial, the prosecution and defence lawyers had agreed Lauren Dickason was mentally unwell when she killed her children.

However, they differed as to whether her mental state was such that she was not fully aware of what she was doing.

In court, crown prosecutor Andrew McRae told the jury that anger had driven Dickason to murder her children.

But Lauren Dickason’s lawyer Kerryn Beaton had argued that the girls deaths were not due to anger and resentment, but were the result of a “severe mental illness”.

