BERLIN, Dec 14 (Reuters) - President Volodymyr Zelenskiy called on Sunday for a "dignified" peace and guarantees that Russia would not attack Ukraine again as he prepared to meet U.S. envoys and European allies in Berlin to end Europe's deadliest conflict since World War Two.
Under pressure from U.S. President Donald Trump to sign a peace deal that initially backed Moscow's demands, Zelenskiy accused Russia of dragging out the war through deadly bombings of cities and Ukraine's power and water supplies.
The Reuters Daily Briefing newsletter provides all the news you need to start your day. Sign up here.
Although the exact make-up of the meetings on Sunday and Monday have not been made public, a U.S. official said Trump's envoy Steve Witkoff and son-in-law Jared Kushner were travelling to Germany for talks involving Ukrainians and Europeans.
The choice to send Witkoff, who has led negotiations with Ukraine and Russia on a U.S. peace proposal, appeared to be a signal that Washington saw a chance of progress nearly four years after Russia's 2022 invasion.
"Ukraine needs peace on dignified terms, and we are ready to work as constructively as possible. The coming days will be filled with diplomacy. It is critically important that it delivers results," Zelenskiy said on X.
One of Zelenskiy's negotiators, Deputy Foreign Minister Sergiy Kyslytsya, announced "a day of meetings ahead" and posted a picture of himself in Berlin, but gave no further details.
German Chancellor Friedrich Merz is hosting Zelenskiy and European leaders for a summit in the German capital on Monday, the latest in a series of public shows of support for the Ukrainian leader from allies across Europe.
'CRITICAL MOMENT'
Britain, France and Germany have been working to refine the U.S. proposals, which, in a draft disclosed last month, called for Kyiv to cede more territory, abandon its ambition to join NATO and accept limits on its armed forces.
European allies have described this as a "critical moment" that could shape Ukraine's future, and sought to shore up Kyiv's finances by leveraging frozen Russian central bank assets to fund Kyiv's military and civilian budget.
Russian President Vladimir Putin hosted Witkoff and Kushner at a meeting earlier in December that the Kremlin praised as "constructive", although no major breakthroughs were reached.
Zelenskiy said hundreds of thousands were still without power after Russian strikes on energy, heating and water supplies across swathes of Ukraine, posting pictures of burning and destroyed buildings.
"Russia is dragging out the war and seeks to inflict as much harm as possible on our people," he said.
"In total, the Russians launched more than 1,500 attack drones, nearly 900 guided aerial bombs, and 46 missiles of various types against Ukraine this week," he added.


HONG KONG, Dec 14 (Reuters) - Hong Kong's last major opposition party disbanded on Sunday after a vote by its members, the culmination of Chinese pressure on the city's remaining liberal voices in a years-long security crackdown.
The Democratic Party has been Hong Kong's flagship opposition since its founding three years before the financial hub's return to Chinese rule from Britain in 1997. It used to sweep city-wide legislative elections and push China on democratic reforms and upholding freedom.
The Reuters Daily Briefing newsletter provides all the news you need to start your day. Sign up here.
However, mass pro-democracy protests in 2019 against a perceived tightening of China's grip on the city prompted Beijing to enact a sweeping national security law to stifle dissent.
On Sunday, members of the Democratic Party voted to disband the party and to enter liquidation, Chairman Lo Kin-hei told reporters after an extraordinary general meeting.
"To have journeyed through these three decades, shoulder to shoulder with the people of Hong Kong, has been our greatest honour. Throughout these years, we have always treated the well-being of Hong Kong and its people as our guiding purpose," Lo said.
Of 121 votes cast, 117 voted to disband while 4 abstained.
Senior party members previously told Reuters they had been approached by Chinese officials or middlemen and told to disband or face severe consequences, including possible arrest.
There was no immediate response to a request for comment from the Hong Kong Liaison Office, China's main representative body in Hong Kong.
Emily Lau, a former Democratic Party chairwoman, expressed regret at the vote's outcome.
"Why does an organisation that has done so much for Hong Kong need to end like this? I find it very problematic," she said.
China's "one country, two systems" arrangement, promises Hong Kong a high degree of autonomy. However in recent years, authorities have used new security laws to arrest scores of opponents, disband civil society groups and close media outlets.
"We were never able to have democracy. We never had the chance to elect our government... We hope it (the principle of one country, two systems) won't keep shrinking more and more. We hope there won't be more and more people being arrested," Lau said.
The vote to disband comes a week after Hong Kong held a "patriots only" legislative council election and one day before media mogul and China critic Jimmy Lai receives a verdict in a landmark national security trial.
China's move in 2021 to overhaul Hong Kong's electoral system - allowing only those vetted as "patriots" to run for public office - marginalised the Democratic Party by removing it from mainstream politics.
In June, another pro-democracy group, the League of Social Democrats, said it would disband amid "immense political pressure".
Senior Democratic Party members Wu Chi-wai, Albert Ho, Helena Wong and Lam Cheuk-ting have been jailed or held in custody under a national security law that China imposed in 2020 in response to mass pro-democracy protests the year before.
Some governments, including those of the U.S. and Britain, have criticised the law, saying it has been used to stifle dissent and individual freedom.
China has said no freedom is absolute and that the national security law has restored stability to Hong Kong.


he government’s decision to end the automatic right to family reunion for people fleeing war, conflict and persecution creates “an additional level of cruelty” for refugees, a family therapist working with survivors of torture has told openDemocracy.

Shaheen Syedain, who works for Freedom from Torture, warned of the impact that Labour’s sweeping changes to the asylum system will have.

Under the previous rules, an individual who had been granted refugee status in the UK could apply for their family members to join them, which was one of the few safe and legal routes for people to travel to the UK to seek asylum.

But in September 2025, the government temporarily closed the family reunion route to new applications. Two months later, home secretary Shabana Mahmoud published a new asylum and returns policy, which aims to end the automatic right to family reunion. Going forward, cases will be assessed on an individual basis and will be linked to criteria such as earnings.

Get our free Daily Email
Get one whole story, direct to your inbox every weekday.

Sign up now
More than 20,800 people received refugee family reunion visas in the year ending June 2025, a 30% increase on the previous year. The majority were women and children, most of whom were arriving from Syria, Iran, and Afghanistan.

Many of those who applied to bring their family over arrived in the UK via irregular means, such as crossing the Channel on a small boat. As the journey is so dangerous, young men often travel alone to claim asylum, before bringing their families over safely on the reunification visa.

The far right has increasingly stigmatised the young men who make this journey as “fighting age men”, with the suggestion being that they are a threat or an “invasion”. But the reality is many are teenagers struggling with the trauma of “missing their parents and missing their families”, said Syedain.

Family separation, said Syedain, makes it harder for individuals to “concentrate on their own recovery because they are still inside the trauma of the separation from their families”.

“They’re so fearful for the safety of their families at home, and often rightly so,” she said. That fear, she added, is often combined with trauma linked to guilt “for having left family members behind, and guilt for not being able to look after them the way they want to”.

Syedain continued: “This is a huge part of what these young people experience and carry with them into adulthood. They have these experiences of both being emotionally quite young, because they've been torn away from their families at a very young age and had important attachments interrupted. On the other hand, they're incredibly mature and streetwise, because they've had to look after themselves in all sorts of ways.”

In some cases, it is the family member who is most at risk who journeys first to the UK, such as a parent who has faced persecution or torture. They can then struggle to explain to their children why they have been separated, because, Syedain explained, “most parents obviously don’t say to their children, ‘oh, your father was tortured, that’s why he escaped.’”

She added: “And then years later, they are reunited, and dad is nothing like he was before. Parents do their best to try and kind of tell a story about why it is, or say nothing. When that happens, children try to fill in the gaps.”

Similarly, those who travel to the UK, especially adolescent boys, can experience a sense of estrangement from parents and siblings who have stayed behind, as “they have had these incredibly different, different experiences,” explained Syedain.

“Families have so much hope for the coming together moment, and then find they've changed as people. Children have grown up without one parent. They don't really know the other parent. They've got to get to know that parent again.”

There is, she said, “so much to deal with, and in a situation where you have been looking forward to this thing for years and have invested so much into the reunion.”

To help families manage the complexities of reunion, Syedain offers family therapy sessions where “they have that space to think about what they can and can't share, and to help parents work out how to tell their children things that are truthful but are not necessarily the whole truth.” Children, she said, “don't need to know the details,” but they need a narrative that is coherent.

Alongside the changes to family reunion, the government’s paper on immigration includes reforms such as requiring refugees to wait longer before getting indefinite leave to remain and to reapply for their refugee status every two and a half years up until that point.

The government also plans to return refugees once their country is considered safe, a proposal modelled on Denmark’s controversial returns policy.

A Home Office spokesperson said: “Under this Government’s reforms to create a fairer asylum system, family reunion will no longer be automatic. Those seeking to bring family members to the UK will need to meet stricter criteria going forward. Other routes will be available for eligible individuals to apply to reunite with family.”

“People just want to be together with their families,” Syedain said. “There is this really strong desire, understandable desire, to be together with your family members. This will be devastating for some of our clients.”


n her nine years at the Laura Bonaparte national mental health hospital in Buenos Aires City, Julieta Chevallier has seen suffering widen and deepen.

“When people finally come to see us, it’s usually because they’ve reached the end of their rope,” the social worker told openDemocracy. “What we used to see has now grown sharper, heavier: deeper hopelessness, more suicide attempts, more violence, more acute crises, and a constant anxiety about the economy – even about something as basic as securing food.

“People who had managed to stop using drugs after partially rebuilding their lives with support from social programs are falling back into old patterns.”

At the José A. Esteves neuropsychiatric hospital in Buenos Aires Province, director María Rosa Riva offers a similar warning.

Get our free Daily Email
Get one whole story, direct to your inbox every weekday.

Sign up now
“People are arriving utterly shattered,” said Riva, who has worked at the hospital since 1997 and led it since 2020.

In the 1990s, she said, the emergency room was mainly filled with patients in the grip of severe psychotic episodes, such as schizophrenia. Now, visitors are often experiencing psychomotor agitation linked to problematic drug use, or depression that runs so deep it reawakens latent psychotic breaks, or suicidal thoughts and self-harm – both of which are rising especially sharply among children and adolescents across the country.

Argentina’s mental health began a steep decline after the pandemic, which the World Health Organisation estimated increased global rates of depression and anxiety by between 25% and 27%. In Argentina, this downward trend has deepened since President Javier Milei took office in December 2023 and began drastically shrinking the state.

“Demand for mental health care in the country has risen between 12% and 20% in the past year,” Julieta Calmels, the undersecretary for mental health, problematic substance use, and violence at the Buenos Aires provincial Ministry of Health, told openDemocracy.

“We don’t believe this surge is due to a shift in psychopathology or purely psychic causes,” she added. Instead, mental health authorities from 16 of Argentina’s 23 provinces, including Buenos Aires, which together account for more than half of the country’s population, have written a report putting the blame squarely on Milei’s government.

The document, which openDemocracy has been given exclusive access to and has translated from Spanish, says: “The deterioration of living conditions, growing individualism, the subjective impact of new technologies, and the violent discourse come from political power.”

Across the world, politicians of all stripes continue to gut social services in their respective countries by preaching a simplistic, and false, dogma: That governments must slash spending on social services and shrink the state at all costs. Yet in Argentina, which 15 years ago made a legislative push to improve its citizens’ wellbeing and approved one of the most groundbreaking reforms in the region, austerity-based economics have now worsened the mental health crisis, leaving many service providers under extreme strain as the number of highly vulnerable people soars.

The Milei chainsaw
Since taking office, President Milei has taken his much-discussed ‘chainsaw’ to the country’s healthcare system. His approach has been so extreme that in May this year, Argentina ratified a decision to withdraw from the World Health Organisation.

The budget for the agency overseeing health services was slashed by 70% in the first nine months of 2025. The regulator for medicines, food, and medical products saw its budget cut by 28%. Funding for national hospitals – including Bonaparte – fell by between 30% and 38%. And the National Cancer Institute, which had already suffered a 19% cut in 2024, ceased to exist in 2025.

The government funding allocation for the National Disability Agency, which manages pensions and supports for people with disabilities and is now embroiled in accusations of overpricing and corruption, was cut by 18% this year.

In February of this year, Milei’s government launched an audit into more than a million disability benefits (formally known as non-contributory pensions for ‘work disability’). More than 110,000 have already had their payments cancelled, and the government expects to cut as many as 400,000. Those affected will also lose the health coverage that was tied to their benefits.

The government has also imposed new requirements for applying for the benefit, some of which had previously been ruled unconstitutional.

Even for those who do manage to receive it, the monthly payment is already well below the extreme poverty threshold: last month, it was roughly $206, while the basic food basket cost $365. The basket is the estimated value of a set of basic and essential foods for two adults and two children, but does not include other household costs, such as housing, transport, health and education.

Around 200,000 people have also lost access to private health insurance because they could not afford the premiums after the Milei government deregulated prices. The result was even greater pressure on the public hospital system.

Authorities also suspended the free distribution of medicines for retired workers, including psychiatric drugs and other essential treatments for chronic conditions, although this measure was later overturned by the courts. Meanwhile, the price of medicines has soared, with multiple surveys by industry groups and consumer organisations finding cumulative increases of more than 200% in 2024.

The surge in prices and the collapse of purchasing power under Milei – the minimum wage fell 35% and pensions 23% – triggered a steep drop in medicine sales. Essential treatments suddenly became unreachable for an ever-growing share of the population.

Occupational therapist Celeste Romero knows firsthand how these deep cuts have devastated Argentinian society.

Romero, a professor at the National University of Córdoba and president of the Civil Association Collective Action for Mental Health and Urban Social Integration, works with artisans and entrepreneurs from across the country who face marginalisation, such as disability, homelessness and having been recently released from prisons or discharged from psychiatric hospitals. She helps them to sell their products in a shop in Buenos Aires City.

One of the entrepreneurs is a 29-year-old man who makes origami earrings: cranes, boats, flowers, and hearts that hang delicately from the ears.

“His medication alone costs 900,000 pesos a month (more than $620), “ Romero said. “He gets a 280,000 pesos (about $193) benefit. He has a family who supports him; otherwise, he would fall into a tremendous crisis and hospitalisation… And these situations repeat themselves, again and again and again.”

A landmark law turned into dead letter
It wasn’t supposed to be like this.

Fifteen years ago, in 2010, Argentina adopted its Law on the Right to Mental Health Protection, a landmark reform intended to usher in a community-based model focused on prevention, territorial care, and the closure of neuropsychiatric institutions.

The law mandated that at least 10% of the national health budget be dedicated to mental health, although no government has ever come close to reaching this figure. The highest annual amount ever allocated was 2.66% of the 2023 budget (Milei came to power in December of that year). Next year, the projected mental health budget is just 1.42% of the national health budget, according to the Civil Association for Equality and Justice (ACIJ), which monitors public spending.

ACIJ has warned that investment in the only federal program aimed at strengthening community-based mental health care has fallen “abruptly” since 2016. Alarmingly, that programme will further suffer the Milei ‘chainsaw’ treatment in 2026, with an expected 91.53% cut.

“All the potential the law holds has been defunded,” Eduardo Quiroga, a lawyer with ACIJ’s Disability Rights Program, told openDemocracy. “In a context where demand is rising, the national government’s tools to support the provinces should be expanding, not shrinking.”

“For a very conservative administration with no disability perspective, mental health becomes something you must prove, as if it were a crime,” Pilar Molina of Buenos Aires City’s public guardianship office told openDemocracy. The office acts as an ombudsman to protect the rights of children, adolescents and people who require support to exercise legal capacity.

“When someone is missing a leg or an eye, it’s more obvious... It is both regressive and worrying to push mental health back into a framework where its legitimacy can be questioned,” she added.

Hospitalisations rise as support networks falter
Yet the slashing of welfare budgets, coupled with ever-rising emotional and economic precarity, has only served to further stretch an already strained system.

As community primary care was never properly strengthened under previous governments, and Milei’s administration has only weakened what limited services did exist, patients who could have been supported with more light-touch interventions have been forced into hospitalisation.

“With rising demand and a system that refuses to change,” ACIJ’s Quiroga said, “hospitalisation ends up becoming the main public policy response in mental health, even though it is precisely what the law sought to reverse.”

Between 2019 and 2024, there were 45,785 mental-health-related hospitalisations recorded at public hospitals in Buenos Aires province, which accounts for 38% of Argentina’s population. That’s a 60.9% increase compared to the previous five years. During that period, demand for inpatient care for children and adolescents grew by 13.4% and outpatient care by 50%, which “may indicate significant vital crises within this population”, according to the report signed by the provinces.

By June of this year, more than half of all emergency beds were occupied by patients experiencing acute mental health crises, having suffered drug-related emergencies, or recovering from suicide attempts. The latest Ministry of Health figures, published in June, reveal there have been 14,899 suicide attempts that did not result in deaths nationwide since 2023 – an average of 22 per day.

There were also 4,249 suicide deaths in 2024, according to a report by the Ministry of Security in October. This makes suicide the leading cause of violent death in that year, killing more people than road accidents and homicides, and accounting for 9.8 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants, a rise of 2.6 points in the last two years. More than 30% of those who died by suicide were aged 15 to 29.

Molina, from the capital’s public guardianship office, has worked with roughly 24,000 children and adolescents across 150 public and private schools over the past 15 months. She sees a troubling pattern emerging: “Signs of fragility in their mental health and in their community bonds.”

Nearly a quarter of children aged between eight and 12 who suffer violence never tell anybody about it, Molina said. Among high school students, that figure rises to 26%, or 38% in schools that face structural difficulties, such as high teacher turnover, weak psychology teams, or poor relationships between administrators, teachers, and families.

And as Milei’s chainsaw continues to rip at Argentina’s social bonds, the crisis has only deepened.

“This is not a warning coming from a 45-year-old adult,” Molina said. “It’s eight-year-olds telling us.”

North Korea’s leader Kim Jong Un has hugged injured soldiers in wheelchairs at a ceremony in the capital, Pyongyang, to welcome home troops who served with Russian forces in the war against Ukraine.

State-run Korean Central News Agency said on Saturday that Kim praised the “mass heroism” of the returning 528th Regiment of Engineers of the Korean People’s Army, which had served in Russia’s Kursk region.

Recommended Stories
list of 4 items
list 1 of 4Top global arms producers’ revenues surge as major wars rage: SIPRI report
list 2 of 4South Korean president mulls apology to North
list 3 of 4S Korea, Japan scramble warplanes in response to Russia, China air patrol
list 4 of 4N Korea’s Kim hails ‘ever-victorious’ army’s role in war against Ukraine
end of list
Kim hailed the regiment’s conduct during its 120-day overseas deployment, which commenced in early August and involved combat and engineering duties, including mine clearing in the Kursk region of Russia, where Ukrainian forces had infiltrated and occupied for months before withdrawing.

“You could work a miracle of turning a vast area of danger zone into a safe and secure one in a matter of less than three months, the task which was believed to be impossible to be carried out even in several years,” Kim said, according to South Korea’s Yonhap news agency.

“The armed villains of the West, armed with whatever latest military hardware they are, cannot match this revolutionary army with an unfathomable spiritual depth,” Kim added at the ceremony on Friday.

This picture taken on December 12, 2025 and released from North Korea's official Korean Central News Agency (KCNA) on December 13 shows North Korean leader Kim Jong Un welcoming soldiers from the Korean People's Army's 528th Regiment of Engineers, which returned from an overseas deployment in Russia's Kursk region during Moscow's war with Ukraine, in front of the April 25 House of Culture in Pyongyang. (Photo by KCNA VIA KNS / AFP) / South Korea OUT / SOUTH KOREA OUT / SOUTH KOREA OUT / ---EDITORS NOTE--- RESTRICTED TO EDITORIAL USE - MANDATORY CREDIT "AFP PHOTO/KCNA VIA KNS" - NO MARKETING NO ADVERTISING CAMPAIGNS - DISTRIBUTED AS A SERVICE TO CLIENTS / THIS PICTURE WAS MADE AVAILABLE BY A THIRD PARTY. AFP CAN NOT INDEPENDENTLY VERIFY THE AUTHENTICITY, LOCATION, DATE AND CONTENT OF THIS IMAGE --- /
North Korean leader Kim Jong Un on Friday welcomed soldiers from the Korean People’s Army’s 528th Regiment of Engineers, who returned from an overseas deployment in Russia’s Kursk region [KCNA via AFP]
The North’s leader also spoke of the “heartrending loss” of nine members of the regiment and announced that the unit would be conferred with the Order of Freedom and Independence. The deceased troops would also be honoured with the title Hero of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, KCNA said, referring to North Korea’s official name.

Video footage of the ceremony released by North Korea showed uniformed soldiers disembarking from an aircraft and Kim embracing soldiers seated in wheelchairs, as other soldiers and officials gathered to welcome the troops.

The Russian Ministry of Defence confirmed last month that North Korean troops, who had helped Russia repel Ukraine’s incursion into Kursk, were now involved in clearing the area of mines.

How do you create a foreign policy manifesto for a US president who leads from the gut?

The initial draft fell to Michael Anton, a Maga firebrand whom officials have called the lead author behind the US’s radical new national security strategy (NSS). The document shocked US allies, warning that immigration to Europe would cause “civilizational erasure”, reviving the Monroe doctrine in the western hemisphere, and downgrading the US’s responsibility for great power competition with China and Russia.

Anton, the former director of policy planning at the state department, had previously gained widespread attention in 2016 when he compared the impending elections to a hijacked airliner in which conservatives must radically shake up US politics and reject the pro-immigration stances that were the “mark of a party, a society, a country, a people, a civilization that wants to die”.

“2016 is the Flight 93 election: charge the cockpit or you die,” he wrote under a pseudonym. “To compound the metaphor: a Hillary Clinton presidency is Russian Roulette with a semi-auto. With Trump, at least you can spin the cylinder and take your chances.”

It is no surprise, then, that the recent NSS, usually a ponderous document weighed down by carefully measured bureaucratic-speak, landed like a bombshell. While it survived a tortured bureaucratic process from the state department to Trump’s senior advisers and was released to little fanfare last week, some of the recommendations were radical enough to cause European leaders to say that the US’s Euroscepticism had now become “official doctrine”.

“I think what’s clear is that Maga is trying to be a revolutionary movement,” said Max Bergmann, the director of the Europe, Russia and Eurasia program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. “It’s trying to completely upend postwar US foreign policy and and really change the direction of the country.”

The thinking pushed against decades of bipartisan foreign policy orthodoxythat saw European institutions, including Nato and the European Union, as allies in a great power competition with authoritarian countries like Russia and China. The new document sees the greatest threat coming from immigration – and suggests that the US should court illiberal allies in Europe.

“This is sort of like a divorce,” Bergmann said of the European reaction. “They don’t want the marriage to end. They’re looking for signs that the United States is still interested in them … and this was sort of confirmation that it’s over.”

Skeptics have said that the NSS rarely dictates policy, that it is not attached to any budgets, and questioned whether Donald Trump had even read the 33-page essay.

Traditionally, the NSS is the result of a convoluted interagency process that leads to a “cut-and-paste job”, according to Daniel Hamilton, a former state department official and professor at Johns Hopkins University.

“My guess is he’s never read this thing and never will,” said John Bolton, a former national security adviser to Trump during his first term who has since become a prominent critic of the president. “He didn’t read the national security strategy in the first term, and nobody ever paid any attention to it.”

But in a subsequent interview with Politico, Trump echoed the strategy’s criticisms of mass migration, indicating that even if he does not have time for a policy document, its horror at multiculturalism is closely aligned with his thinking.

“If it keeps going the way it’s going … many of those countries will not be viable countries any longer,” Trump said. “Their immigration policy is a disaster. What they’re doing with immigration is a disaster.”

New Trump doctrine identifies ‘weak’ Europe’s problem: not enough racism
Read more
National security strategies, which have been made public by US administrations since the mid-1980s, have often served as a sparring ring for different visions for US foreign policy, with rival officials injecting language to reflect their key interests.

Under Trump, the White House has significantly slashed staff at key national security apparatuses as part of its effort to streamline government and cull a disloyal bureaucratic “deep state” – including at the national security council, the main forum that would traditionally coordinate US national security policy.

The result is a document that is less polished, but also one that will be more difficult to implement, said observers.

However, the NSS does read as a manifesto for a number of Trump’s closest advisers across the foreign policy space, including JD Vance, who denounced European liberalism in a speech at the Munich security conference in February, and the powerful deputy White House chief of staff Stephen Miller, who has said that immigration should be a top national security priority for this administration. The sections on Latin America closely reflect the thinking of Marco Rubio, Trump’s secretary of state, who, after a shaky start, has established his place among the president’s closest advisers.

a man speaking 
How Stephen Miller is turning the US state department into an ‘anti-immigration machine’
Read more
Trump himself is said to have little interest in policy. As a result, advisers to Trump produced a “written articulation of the gut instinct that the president lives by”, said Hamilton, who is also a nonresident senior fellow at the Brookings Institution’s Center on the United States and Europe.

“That’s about the best you can call it,” he said. “He won’t write it himself or even read it, probably, but his people are trying to give an articulated worldview behind, kind of, where his instincts go.”

While the document does not stipulate specific policy recommendations, there are signs that its spirit is already being implemented in parts of the vast US bureaucracy.

US embassies in Europe, as well as Canada, Australia and New Zealand, have been ordered to gather data on crimes committed by immigrants, and senior officials have said that mass migration is an “existential threat to western civilization and the safety of both the west and the world”. The 2024 human rights report from the state department, said to be edited before release by Anton and other senior aides to Rubio, reported “significant human rights issues” in Germany including censorship and antisemitism, while softening language on Israel’s war in Gaza and reports of torture and extrajudicial killings in El Salvador.

Senior US diplomats also are issuing warnings to Europe as they recast the European Union as a key rival.

“Either the great nations of Europe are our partners in protecting the Western civilization that we inherited from them or they are not,” wrote Christopher Landau, the deputy secretary of state who has taken the lead on promoting the administration’s immigration goals, shortly after the document’s release. “But we cannot pretend that we are partners while those nations allow the EU’s unelected, undemocratic, and unrepresentative bureaucracy in Brussels to pursue policies of civilizational suicide.”

Anton left government in September months before the document was released. Diplomats said that he had grown frustrated at the state department where other powerful allies to the secretary of state, Marco Rubio, were tasked with making key decisions.

“He was facing headwinds [at the state department] and could hardly speak for the administration,” said one former state department official.

In conservative circles, some people have warned that while the Trump administration may not implement the vision described in the NSS, Trump’s potential successors, including Vance, have a draft for a future Maga foreign policy.

“Read as a blueprint for the rest of the Trump presidency, the NSS can be oversold,” wrote the Wall Street Journal in an editorial. “But that doesn’t mean it can be safely ignored. The NSS represents the worldview of those who hope to shape American policy long after MrTrump completes his second term. Their ideas matter.”

Chileans will head to the polls on Sunday for a presidential runoff in which the favourite is a Donald Trump-inspired candidate who has pledged to build a wall along the country’s borders to keep migrants out.

José Antonio Kast, 59, an ultra-conservative former congressman who has built his campaign on a promise to expel tens of thousands of undocumented migrants, faces Jeannette Jara, 51, a former labour minister under the current centre-left president, Gabriel Boric, 39.

Jara finished the first round ahead, with 26.9% to 23.9%, but while she was the unified candidate of a leftwing coalition, rightwing contenders, including Kast, together took more than half of the votes.

a m an in a suit speaks into a microphone
‘We need an iron fist’: the Trump-inspired favourite to win Chile’s election
Read more
For that reason, and given recent polling, Kast – the son of a Nazi party member, an admirer of the dictator Augusto Pinochet and a staunch Catholic known for his opposition to abortion and same-sex marriage – is widely expected to rule Chile for the next four years.

One novelty in this election, however, has led analysts to urge caution in calling his victory: for the first time in more than a decade, voting is once again compulsory.

In past elections, about a third of the country’s 15 million voters did not usually take part. “These 5 million people are more distrustful of politics,” said Claudia Heiss, a political scientist at the Universidad de Chile, who argued that in November’s first round, this “new” electorate was attracted by rightwing populist promises and voted against the ruling coalition.

But Heiss says this voting bloc’s behaviour in the runoff remains unpredictable: another candidate, economist Franco Parisi, 58, appeared to benefit from their backing. Parisi, who was running for a third time, still presented himself as an “outsider” and secured a surprising third place with 20% of the vote.

“Parisi appealed to an audience of young men who generally had no political engagement,” said Rossana Castiglioni, a political science professor at the Universidad Diego Portales.

Now, she said, it is difficult to know where Parisi’s votes will go, since, unlike the other defeated rightwing candidates, he did not endorse Kast in the runoff. Instead, he stuck to his campaign slogan of “neither fascist nor communist”, and many of his voters may end up spoiling their ballots as a form of protest.

Still, “if we trust the polls, everything indicates that Kast should be the winner”, said Castiglioni.

Heiss said that Kast has benefited from a wave of public “paranoia” on security and migration. Chile’s immigrant population has doubled in the past decade, fuelled by about 700,000 Venezuelans forced to leave their country amid its economic collapse.

“There is a fear linked to the emergence of new forms of crime that weren’t common here – such as contract killings, kidnappings and extortion – linked to the arrival of foreign organised crime groups, but they are not the bulk of migrants coming to Chile,” said Heiss.

“Heightened fear has created fertile ground for penal populism and iron-fist policies,” she added.

In a presidential debate, Kast twice claimed that “1.2 million people are murdered each year in Chile”, a completely unrealistic figure. Despite an increase in recent years, the country actually registers about 1,200 homicides a year, still making it one of the safest in Latin America.

Like many rightwing leaders across the region, Kast describes himself as an admirer of El Salvador’s president Nayib Bukele, who has imprisoned at least 2% of his country’s adult population as part of a controversial crackdown on gangs. “Every Chilean voting today, if Bukele were on the ballot, would choose Bukele,” he said in another debate.

Jara has also presented her own version of an “iron fist” policy, saying security is her “top priority” and promising to build five new prisons and expel immigrants convicted of drug trafficking.

While Jara says she wants to register the roughly 330,000 undocumented migrants through biometric identification, Kast has given them an ultimatum to leave before the next president takes office on 11 March or be expelled “with only the clothes on their backs”.

Migrants are a central focus of his platform, which includes a Trump-inspired plan to build detention centres and 5-metre-high walls, electric fences and 3-metre-deep trenches as well as an increased military presence along the border, particularly in the north, on the frontier with Peru and Bolivia.

Despite Kast’s clear praise and references to Trump, the US president has not expressed support for his Chilean follower, unlike in other Latin American elections this year – including Argentina and Honduras, where analysts and local politicians criticised Trump for outright interference.

Even without any sign of support from his political lodestar, Kast has continued to revere Trump and his actions. Asked in the debate whether he would support a US ground intervention in Venezuela, the ultra-conservative responded positively, using the motto of Chile’s national coat of arms: “By reason or by force.”

Two US army soldiers and one American civilian interpreter have been killed and several other people wounded in an ambush on Saturday by the Islamic State group in central Syria, the Pentagon said.

The attack on US troops in Palmyra is the first to inflict casualties since the fall of the former Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, a year ago.

“We mourn the loss of three great patriots in Syria,” Donald Trump told reporters as he left the White House to attend the army-navy football game in Baltimore. “We also have three wounded. They seem to be doing pretty well.”

“This was an Isis attack on us and Syria,” Trump added. “We will retaliate.”

“The attack occurred as the soldiers were conducting a key leader engagement,” the Pentagon’s chief spokesperson, Sean Parnell, said in a statement. “Their mission was in support of on-going counter-ISIS / counter-terrorism operations in the region.”

The attacker “was killed by partner forces”, Pete Hegseth, the US defense secretary, wrote on the social media platform X.

Central Command said in a post on X that as a matter of respect for the families and in accordance with defense department policy, the identities of the service members “will be withheld until 24 hours after their next of kin have been notified”.

Syria’s state media and a war monitor reported earlier on Saturday that shots were fired at Syrian and US forces on Saturday during a visit by American troops to the historic central town of Palmyra.

According to the state-run Sana news agency, two members of Syria’s security force and several US service members were wounded. The injured were taken by helicopters to the al-Tanf garrison near the border with Iraq and Jordan.

Sana said the attacker was killed, without providing further details.

Syria’s interior ministry spokesperson, Nour al-Din al-Baba, said a gunman linked to Islamic State opened fire at the gate of a military post. He added that Syrian authorities are looking into whether the gunman was an Islamic State member or only carried its extreme ideology. He denied a report from the Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights that the attacker was a security member.

The US has hundreds of troops deployed in eastern Syria as part of a coalition fighting the Islamic State.

Last month, Syria joined the international coalition fighting against the Islamic State as Damascus improves its relations with western countries following last year’s fall of Assad when insurgents captured his seat of power.

The US had no diplomatic relations with Syria under Assad, but ties have warmed since the fall of the five-decade family rule. The interim president, Ahmed al-Sharaa, a former Islamist militant, made a historic visit to Washington last month, where he held talks with Donald Trump.

The Islamic State was defeated in Syria in 2019 but the group’s sleeper cells still carry out deadly attacks in the country. The United Nations says the group still has between 5,000 and 7,000 fighters in Syria and Iraq.

US troops, which have maintained a presence in different parts of Syria – including the al-Tanf garrison in the central province of Homs – to train other forces as part of a broad campaign against the Islamic State, have been targeted in the past. One of the deadliest attacks occurred in 2019 in the northern town of Manbij, when a blast killed two US service members and two American civilians as well as others from Syria while they were conducting a patrol.
e was supposed to be touting the economy but could not resist taking aim at an old foe. “Which is better: Sleepy Joe or Crooked Joe?” Donald Trump teased supporters in Pennsylvania this week, still toying with nicknames for his predecessor Joe Biden. “Typically, Crooked Joe wins. I’m surprised because to me he’s a sleepy son of a bitch.”

Exulting in Biden’s drowsiness, the US president and his supporters seemed blissfully ignorant of a rich irony: that 79-year-old Trump himself has recently been spotted apparently dozing off at various meetings.

The unlikely simpatico between the two men did not end there. Tuesday’s event marked the launch of a Trump roadshow designed to reassure voters that the US economy is in safe hands despite the evidence of their pockets. In that there was an uncomfortable echo of Biden’s travels to champion “Bidenomics”, which did not end well for him.

At every turn, Trump seeks to distance himself from his Democratic rival, accusing him of driving up inflation and illegal immigration and botching the US military withdrawal from Afghanistan. Yet now the Republican is finding himself shouldering the same burdens of an affordability crisis and the inexorable march of time.

“It’s hard not to see the parallels both in terms of their age and how that manifests itself and certainly the condition of the economy,” said Kurt Bardella, a political analyst and NewsNation contributor. “Trump has been cast in this role that Joe Biden had to play out and seemingly trying to use the same script, which is to convince people that you’re not feeling what you’re really feeling. It’s an unenviable political challenge.”

Biden and Trump are the two oldest presidents in US history. The Democrat was dogged by concerns over his mental and physical fitness during his four years in office, reaching a climax after a disastrous debate performance that led him to decide against seeking re-election. Biden’s aides were condemned for trying to shield his frailty from the public and media.

That has been useful political fodder for Trump, seeking to contrast Biden’s decline with his own political virility. He has created a “presidential walk of fame” at the White House where Biden is represented by the image of an autopen. He said of Biden recently: “He sleeps all the time – during the day, during the night, on the beach. I’m not a sleeper.”

Yet Trump is now facing health issues of his own. In July the White House announced that he had a medical checkup after noticing “mild swelling” in his lower legs and was found to have a condition common in older adults that causes blood to pool in his veins.

Photos also showed bruising on the back of Trump’s hand, covered by makeup that was not an exact match to his skin tone. This week he has been sporting bandages on his right hand. On Thursday White House press secretary Karoline Leavitt said they were the result of the president “constantly shaking hands”.

Meanwhile Trump admitted that he had “no idea” what part of his body had been the subject of a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan in October. The White House subsequently said he had MRI imaging on his heart and abdomen in October as part of a preventative screening for men his age and the result was “perfectly normal”.

Perhaps most striking, on more than one occasion lately Trump has appeared to be fighting sleep. In the Oval Office and at a cabinet meeting his eyelids could be seen drooping, even as cabinet secretaries showered him with praise.

Critics say that Trump’s rambling, repetitive speeches and social media posts are further evidence of cognitive decline since they often shoot from topic to topic with bizarre non sequiturs. However, like the gaffe-prone Biden before him, it is not always clear what can be attributed to age and what to his essential character.

Reed Galen, president of the Union, a pro-democracy coalition, said: “He’s older, he’s worse, but I don’t know that should surprise any of us at this point. Whereas Biden got older and got quieter, Trump gets older and gets louder – when he’s awake.”

As Trump’s second term wears on, the scrutiny is only likely to intensify. A New York Times analysis of his schedule found that he has fewer public events and is traveling domestically far less than he did by this point during his first year in office, in 2017, although he is going on more overseas trips.

The president responded on social media that he was history’s hardest-working president with a lengthy list of accomplishments. He said he went out of his way to do “long, thorough and very boring” medical examinations, including three cognitive tests that he “ACED”.

He added: “The New York Times, and some others, like to pretend that I am ‘slowing up,’ and maybe not as sharp as I once was, or am in poor physical health, knowing that it is not true.”

The health of US presidents has long been a delicate and sometimes thorny issue between the White House and the press. Bardella, a former Republican congressional staffer who switched to the Democrats, said: “Donald Trump and Republicans are going to be held to the same standard that they set for Biden.

“You don’t get to challenge the media constantly and accuse the media of covering up Biden’s health and mental deterioration, and then turn around with someone who is certainly manifesting signs of old age and be bewildered that the same media that you ginned up and lectured and chastised and sued is now doing the same thing to you.”

Both presidents began their terms like men in a hurry. Biden, inheriting the Covid pandemic, sought to turn a crisis into an opportunity with a blitz of executive orders and the $1.9tn American Rescue Plan, following up with ambitious legislation on infrastructure, semiconductor manufacturing and the most substantial climate and clean energy investment in history.

But from mid-2021 inflation surged, reaching a 40-year high for reasons including pandemic supply-chain disruption, stimulus-driven demand, global energy volatility and the war in Ukraine. Although the administration eventually brought inflation back down to around 3%, it struggled to sell a message in the court of public opinion.

In a 2023 address in Chicago, Biden insisted: “Bidenomics is working … Today, the US has had the highest economic growth rate, leading the world economies since the pandemic.” But by August 2023 just 36% of Americans approved of his handling of the economy, according to a poll by the Associated Press-Norc Center for Public Affairs Research. In 2024 fact checkers found Biden guilty of making false claims about inflation.

Now the shoe is on the other foot. The cost of living was a top voter concern in the 2024 presidential election and again in last month’s races for governor of New Jersey and Virginia and mayor of New York, where Democrats swept the board.

Government data shows that job growth has slowed during Trump’s second term, unemployment has risen to its highest level in four years and consumer prices remain high, due in part to his sweeping tariffs. He is accused of not paying sufficient attention to voters who say they are struggling to make ends meet.

His 90-minute speech on Tuesday veered into attacks on the word “affordability”, which Trump derided as a “hoax” by Democrats to exaggerate the cost of living. While he did acknowledge that prices were high, he insisted the economy was booming and people were taking home more pay.

Pennsylvania governor Josh Shapiro, a Democrat, posted on social media that Trump spent his speech “telling Pennsylvanians not to believe what they can see with their own two eyes – the skyrocketing cost of living and rising prices at the grocery store”. It was precisely the kind of charge that Republicans used to level against Biden.

Bardella commented: “Just as many Republicans – rightfully so in my opinion – mocked Biden and his team and Democrats for the Bidenomics vocabulary, for the ‘I know you feel like the economy is tough but whatever … ,’ here Trump is also facing a very sceptical electorate that doesn’t feel like the economy is working for them.

“It’s incredibly ironic that, for the better part of this decade, we’re looking at two presidents pushing 80 trying to convince the American people that they have a better pulse on their economic situation than than they do.”

Trump’s approval rating edged up to 41% in a new Reuters/Ipsos poll as he reversed some tariffs on food imports and spoke more about combating inflation. But the approval rating on his performance on the cost of living was just 31%. His chief of staff Susie Wiles has said she wants him to “campaign like it’s 2024 again” to help turn out his supporters for congressional midterm elections in November.

Some observers suspect that he will walk into the same messaging trap that Biden did. Larry Jacobs, director of the Center for the Study of Politics and Governance at the University of Minnesota, said: “One of the oddest political dynamics we’re seeing today is that Donald Trump appears to be repeating Joe Biden’s mistake and underestimating the potency of inflation and the difficulty in affording the basics in life.

“This idea that Donald Trump can give a few speeches and this is going to make a dent in what polls show to be the number one issue in the minds of Americans is foolish. The political consequences for Donald Trump are going to be similar to what they were for Joe Biden, which is potentially quite significant losses in midterm elections and a crippling of the Republican party, perhaps in 2028.”
The family of Virginia Giuffre have expressed their “deep disappointment” that Andrew Mountbatten-Windsor will not face a criminal investigation in the UK over allegations against him.

It was alleged that Mountbatten-Windsor had sex in London with a teenager who was trafficked, and then put pressure on his police protection officer to dig up dirt on her.

The Metropolitan police on Saturday said after weeks of review, it would not launch any formal criminal investigation into King Charles’s brother. Mountbatten-Windsor’s ties to the convicted child sex offender Jeffrey Epstein led to the stripping of his royal status.

His alleged victim, Virginia Giuffre, claimed in a 2021 US lawsuit that Andrew had sex with her after she had been trafficked by Epstein at a home in Belgravia, London, in 2001 when she was 17.

In a US lawsuit she said she was “lent out for sexual purposes” to the then Duke of York in London, and on two other occasions outside the United Kingdom.

Mountbatten-Windsor, 65, has always denied that claim and any other wrongdoing, and maintained his position when he paid money to settle the lawsuit in 2022.

The family of Giuffre said they were “deeply disappointed” by the force’s decision to drop the investigation “without explanation” and that they were not told this announcement was coming.

They said in a statement: “We emailed with a detective from the Metropolitan police yesterday, Friday, Dec 12th, who gave us no indication that this announcement was imminent.

“Indeed, he asked us if we had any evidence we would like to present; we had not yet replied.

“With the Epstein files about to be released by [the US] Congress since the passage of the Epstein Transparency Act, we are surprised that the Metropolitan police didn’t wait to see what further evidence might appear.

“While we have hailed the UK’s overall handling of the case of Andrew Mountbatten-Windsor previously, today we feel justice has not been served.

“We continue to challenge the system that protects abusers, especially as more evidence comes to light that can hold people accountable. Our sister Virginia, and all survivors, are owed this much.”

It is understood that on some of the former prince’s meetings with Epstein, a Met protection officer accompanied him, as he was entitled to police protection given his royal status.

On Saturday, the Met said no allegation against Mountbatten-Windsor would be the subject of any formal criminal investigation in the UK. That includes claims he asked his Met police protection officer to investigate Giuffre in 2011, after she had gone public with her claims against him.

Any criminal investigation would have involved the king’s brother being interviewed under criminal caution, if not arrested. The Met’s decision was reached without speaking to the former prince.

In a new statement, the Met commander Ella Marriott said the force had decided to stand by its previous decision. Marriott said: “In 2015, the Metropolitan police service received allegations relating to non-recent trafficking for sexual exploitation involving Jeffrey Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell.

“These allegations primarily concerned events outside the United Kingdom, with one allegation of trafficking to central London in March 2001.

“Officers assessed all available evidence at the time, interviewed the complainant, Ms Virginia Giuffre as well as contacting several other potential victims. This did not result in any allegation of criminal conduct against any UK-based nationals.

“The MPS sought advice from the Crown Prosecution Service and liaised with US authorities, who were leading investigations into related matters involving US nationals. Following this legal advice, it was clear that any investigation into human trafficking would be largely focused on activities outside the UK and perpetrators based overseas.

“Officers therefore concluded, in consultation with the CPS, that other international authorities were best placed to progress these allegations. Officers maintained close liaison with the US and other relevant authorities throughout their investigation to ensure any UK matters could be identified and to consider any support requested.

“A decision was made in November 2016 not to proceed to a full criminal investigation. That decision was reviewed in August 2019 and again in 2021 and 2022; in each instance, the position remained unchanged, and Ms Giuffre and her legal representative were informed.”

The Met said there would be no criminal investigation into claims Mountbatten-Windsor tried to get his police protection officers to smear his accuser.

It is understood none of the protection officers at that time, who have been spoken to by Met investigators, supported claims that Mountbatten-Windsor asked them to find material that might undermine Giuffre.

Detectives examined the Met’s records dating back more than a decade to see if any officer searched for material on Giuffre. Some records no longer existed.

In October, the Mail on Sunday claimed an email showed Mountbatten-Windsor passed Giuffre’s date of birth and social security number to his bodyguard in 2011 and asked him to dig up dirt to smear his accuser.

On Saturday Marriott said: “This assessment has not revealed any additional evidence of criminal acts or misconduct.

“In the absence of any further information, we will be taking no further action. As with any other matter, should new and relevant information be brought to our attention, including in any information resulting from the release of material in the US, we will assess it.”

A former senior prosecutor said there could be enough reason to criminally investigate Mountbatten-Windsor for his alleged sexual attack on Giuffre.

Nick Vamos, the former head of special crime at the CPS, said: “If Ms Giuffre did not consent to sex, and Andrew did not reasonably believe that she consented to sex, then it would be rape. If it could be proved that Andrew knew that Giuffre had been trafficked then that would be compelling evidence that he could not have reasonably believed that Giuffre had the freedom to choose whether to consent.”

Giuffre is now dead, but her New York lawsuit said the British socialite Ghislaine Maxwell recruited her for Epstein’s sex trafficking enterprise. Maxwell is in a US prison.

In her 2021 civil lawsuit brought against the former prince in the southern district of New York, Giuffre said: “Prince Andrew committed sexual assault and battery upon plaintiff when she was 17 years old. As such, Prince Andrew is responsible for battery and intentional infliction of emotional distress pursuant to New York common law. The damage to plaintiff has been severe and lasting.

“Prince Andrew abused plaintiff on separate occasions when she was under the age of 18 years old. On one occasion, Prince Andrew sexually abused plaintiff in London at Maxwell’s home. During this encounter, Epstein, Maxwell, and Prince Andrew forced plaintiff, a child, to have sexual intercourse with Prince Andrew against her will.”

Giuffre also alleged the former prince had sex with her on two other occasions outside the UK. Giuffre’s sworn statement said: “During each of the aforementioned incidents, plaintiff was compelled by express or implied threats by Epstein, Maxwell, and/or Prince Andrew to engage in sexual acts with Prince Andrew, and feared death or physical injury to herself or another and other repercussions for disobeying Epstein, Maxwell, and Prince Andrew due to their powerful connections, wealth, and authority.

“Prince Andrew engaged in each of the aforementioned sexual acts with plaintiff at Epstein and Maxwell’s invitation, knowing that she was a sex-trafficking victim being forced to engage in sexual acts with him.

“During each of the aforementioned incidents, plaintiff did not consent to engaging in sexual acts with Prince Andrew. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Prince Andrew sexually abused plaintiff for the purpose of gratifying his sexual desires.”

Vamos said Giuffre’s book published posthumously this year could not be used as evidence, but her testimony for the New York lawsuit could be: “A sworn statement she had made in the past could be admissible such as her statement in the New York lawsuit. The book would probably not be.

“You would have to prove that she did not consent, had been trafficked, and Andrew knew that and thus could not reasonably believe she had freely consented.”

Mountbatten-Windsor has always denied Giuffre’s claim and any other wrongdoing.
The ink was barely dry on Donald Trump’s artificial intelligence executive order when Gavin Newsom came out swinging. Just hours after the order went public Thursday evening, the California governor issued a statement saying the presidential dictum, which seeks to block states from regulating AI of their own accord, advances “grift and corruption” instead of innovation.

“President Trump and David Sacks aren’t making policy – they’re running a con,” Newsom said, referencing Trump’s AI adviser and crypto “czar”. “Every day, they push the limits to see how far they can take it.”

Trump’s executive order is a major victory for tech companies that have campaigned against legislative barriers to developing and deploying their AI products. It also sets up a clash between state governments and the White House over the future of AI regulation. The immediate backlash from groups including child safety organizations, unions and state officials has highlighted the deeply contentious nature of the order and diverse range of interests it affects.

Several officials and organizations have already questioned the legality of the executive order, stating that Trump does not have the power to undermine state legislation on AI and denouncing the decree as the result of tech industry lobbying. California, home to some of the world’s most prominent AI companies and one of the most active states legislating AI, has been a locus for pushback against the order.

Donald Trump prior to signing the executive order on AI, at the White House on 11 December 2025.
Trump signs executive order aimed at preventing states from regulating AI
Read more
“This executive order is deeply misguided, wildly corrupt, and will actually hinder innovation and weaken public trust in the long run,” California Democratic representative Sara Jacobs said in a statement. “We will explore all avenues – from the courts to Congress – to reverse this decision.”

After a draft version of Trump’s order leaked in November, state attorney general Rob Bonta said that his office would “take steps to examine the legality or potential illegality of such an executive order”, teeing up a precedent-setting duel between California and the White House.

Legislative loggerheads
In September, Newsom signed a landmark AI law that would compel developers of large, powerful AI models known as “frontier models” to provide transparency reports and promptly report safety incidents or face fines up to $1m. The governor touted the Transparency in Frontier Artificial Intelligence act as an example for how to regulate AI companies nationwide.

“Our state’s status as a global leader in technology allows us a unique opportunity to provide a blueprint for well-balanced AI policies beyond our borders,” Newsom said in an address to the California state senate. “Especially in the absence of a comprehensive federal AI policy framework and national AI safety standards.”

The September bill and more California legislation could be in Trump’s crosshairs. Thursday’s executive order calls for an AI litigation taskforce that would review state laws that do not “enhance the United States’ global AI dominance” and then pursue legal action or potentially withhold federal broadband funding. The taskforce will also consult with the administration’s AI and crypto “czar” to determine which laws to target.

Although Trump has framed the executive order as a means of streamlining legislation and removing onerously patchwork regulation, critics have alleged that the government has never provided any comprehensive federal framework for regulating AI to replace state laws. The order follows attempts to include similar AI moratoriums in bills earlier this year, which failed due to bipartisan backlash. Instead, opponents view the order as a gift to major tech companies that have cozied up to the administration over the course of the year.

“President Trump’s unlawful executive order is nothing more than a brazen effort to upend AI safety and give tech billionaires unchecked power over working people’s jobs, rights and freedoms,” AFL-CIO president, Liz Shuler, said in a statement.

Nationwide backlash
Within hours of Trump signing the order, opposition loudened among lawmakers, labor leaders, children’s advocacy groups and civil liberties organizations that decried the policy. Other California Democratic leaders said the executive order was an assault on state rights and the administration should instead focus on federal agencies and academic research to boost innovation.

“No place in America knows the promise of artificial intelligence technologies better than California,” said Alex Padilla, a senator for California. “But with today’s executive order, the Trump administration is attacking state leadership and basic safeguards in one fell swoop.”

Similarly, Adam Schiff, another California senator, emphasized: “Trump is seeking to preempt state laws that are establishing meaningful safeguards around AI and replace them with … nothing.”

Lawmakers from Colorado to Virginia to New York also took issue with the order. Don Beyer, a Virginia congressmember called it a “terrible idea” and said that it would “create a lawless Wild West environment for AI companies”. Likewise, Alex Bores, a New York state assemblymember, called the order a “massive windfall” for AI companies, adding that “a handful of AI oligarchs bribed Donald Trump into selling out America’s future”.

a composite image showing two older white men in suits
Lies, damned lies and AI: the newest way to influence elections may be here to stay
Read more
Even Steve Bannon, Trump loyalist and former adviser, criticized the policy. In a text message to Axios, Bannon said Sacks had “completely misled the President on preemption”. Mike Kubzansky, the CEO of Omidyar Network, a philanthropic tech investment firm that funds AI companies, similarly said “the solution is not to preempt state and local laws” and that ignoring AI’s impact on the country “through a blanket moratorium is an abdication of what elected officials owe their constituents”.

Blowback against the order has also included child protection organizations that have long expressed concerns over the effects of AI on children. The debate over child safety has intensified this year in the wake of multiple lawsuits against AI companies over children who died by suicide after interacting with popular chatbots.

“The AI industry’s relentless race for engagement already has a body count, and, in issuing this order, the administration has made clear it is content to let it grow,” said James Steyer, the CEO of child advocacy group Common Sense Media. “Americans deserve better than tech industry handouts at the expense of their wellbeing.”

A group of bereaved parents and child advocacy organizations have also spoken out. They have been working to pass legislation to better protect children from harmful social media and AI chatbots and released a national public service announcement on Thursday opposing the AI preemption policy. Separately, Sarah Gardner, the CEO of Heat Initiative, one of the groups in the coalition, called the order “unacceptable”.

“Parents will not roll over and allow our children to remain lab rats in big tech’s deadly AI experiment that puts profits over the safety of our kids,” Gardner said. “We need strong protections at the federal and state level, not amnesty for big tech billionaires.”

ll Hollywood stars grow old and die except perhaps one - Dick Van Dyke - who turns 100 today. The real world Peter Pan who used to trip over the ottoman on The Dick Van Dyke Show is still standing. The man who impersonated a wind-up toy in Chitty Chitty Bang Bang hasn’t wound down just yet. He has outlived mentors, co-stars, romantic partners and several studios. He’s even outlived the jokes about his performance in Mary Poppins. These days his mangled cockney accent is regarded with more fondness than contempt. It’s seen as one of the great charms of the 1964 classic, along with the carousel chase or the cartoon dancing penguins.

Accent on the charm … Dick Van Dyke with Julie Andrews in Mary Poppins.
View image in fullscreen
Accent on the charm … Dick Van Dyke with Julie Andrews in Mary Poppins. Photograph: Donaldson Collection/Getty Images
Charm is the magic ingredient of every popular entertainer and few have possessed it in such abundance as Van Dyke, the impoverished son of a travelling cookie salesman who dropped out of high school and educated himself at the movies. “His job in this life is to make a happier world,” his Broadway co-star Chita Rivera once said - and this may explain his stubborn refusal to quit, not while times are tough and he feels that audiences still need cheering up.

Naturally his workrate has now slowed, but in the past few years he has competed on the TV show The Masked Singer, starred in a Coldplay video and enthusiastically stumped for Bernie Sanders. Van Dyke simply couldn’t understand why America’s older citizens were resistant to Sanders’ democratic socialist domestic policies. He said, “I want to urge my generation to get out and vote for him, please.”

Too much energy … Dick Van Dyke in Chitty Chitty Bang Bang.
View image in fullscreen
Too much energy … Dick Van Dyke in Chitty Chitty Bang Bang. Photograph: Moviestore/REX/Shutterstock
As he nudges into triple figures, he has become a piece of living history: a walking, talking chronicle of US showbusiness itself. Van Dyke began his career performing for the troops in the second world war and proceeded to rub shoulders with the likes of Phil Silvers and Walt Disney. He had one foot in music-hall slapstick and the other in screwball comedy, and possibly splayed fingers in his midwestern hometown of Danville, Illinois.

In bridging these worlds, he perfected an outward-facing public image that was one part Stan Laurel to two parts Jimmy Stewart: a pratfalling clown who was decent and honest and smarter than he first appeared. And while he was already nearing 40 when The Dick Van Dyke Show and Mary Poppins made him an international star, the actor remained irrepressibly boyish. In 1968’s Chitty Chitty Bang Bang, he played Caractacus Potts, the madcap inventor who dreams up a flying car, while Lionel Jeffries - six months younger - played Potts’s addled and eccentric dad.

Van Dyke, by and large, has steered clear of dark films. He famously turned down the lead role in The Omen and insists that he mostly played a version of himself. “Wholesome,” he says. “An all-round good boy.” That’s true so far as it goes, although it’s probably only half the story, because Van Dyke’s interpretation conveniently sidesteps a 25-year struggle with alcoholism that spanned his professional heyday. Possibly it also glosses over the air of dancing mischief – even wildness – that animates his most feted, family-friendly performances.

Sparring mutual respect … Mary Tyler Moore and Dick Van Dyke in The Dick Van Dyke Show (1961).
View image in fullscreen
Sparring mutual respect … Mary Tyler Moore and Dick Van Dyke in The Dick Van Dyke Show (1961). Photograph: CBS Photo Archive/CBS/Getty Images
Or to put it more bluntly, Van Dyke may have been mainstream but he never once felt conservative, nor even cosy, exactly. He brought too much energy to the room. It was as though he’d just blown in from outside and wasn’t entirely housetrained. The Dick Van Dyke Show – an otherwise standard 60s family sitcom – is notable for the crackling sexual chemistry and sparring mutual respect which Van Dyke cooked up with his co-star, Mary Tyler Moore.

Caractacus Potts, for his part, is the ultimate rackety dad: loving and exciting and liable to forget every birthday and dentist appointment. And then there is Bert, the sweep from Mary Poppins who trips across London’s rooftops like an urbanised Puck of Pook’s Hill. The evidence suggests that Bert isn’t cockney at all. He’s a spooky nature spirit, antic and mercurial, who is gamely attempting to pass himself off as a local.

Campaigning for Bernie Sanders, 2020.
View image in fullscreen
Campaigning for Bernie Sanders, 2020. Photograph: Étienne Laurent/EPA
Van Dyke is 100 and therefore no longer looks like Peter Pan. He looks, if anything, the platonic ideal of old age, with laughter lines and a thick white beard, the weathered embodiment of a life well lived. In his later years, he has grown used to people asking him for health advice, to the point where he even sat down and listed it all in a book (100 Rules for Living to 100).

Dick Van Dyke and a porpoise
Porpoises rescue Dick Van Dyke
Read more
The man is too self-aware to present himself as a paragon of good living. Instead he credits his longevity to a sprinkle of everyday magic – a combination of good genes, solid friendships and a positive mental outlook. “My life has been a magnificent indulgence,” he says. “I’ve been able to do what I love and share it with the world.”

It’s an arrangement that has sustained him for a full century on the planet. It’s fuelled a career so rewarding and fun that it barely felt like work at all. Van Dyke started out as showbusiness’s gawky gatecrasher, a controlled explosion of elastic limbs and rubber-faced double-takes, before maturing by degrees into Hollywood’s twinkling Father Time. He is ancient but evergreen, feted and cherished. And he’s altogether as lucky as lucky can be
Cambodia has shut its border crossings with Thailand, as fighting continues between the two forces on Saturday despite US President Donald Trump earlier saying they had agreed to a ceasefire.

The crossings will be closed until further notice, according to Cambodia's interior ministry.

Earlier, Thai Prime Minister Anutin Charnvirakul said he told Trump a ceasefire would only be possible after Cambodia had withdrawn all its forces and removed landmines.

Thai officials said four soldiers were killed on Saturday, as both sides reported continued bombing and artillery exchanges. Cambodia has not been updating its military casualty figure.

Cambodia's defence ministry said that Thai fighter jets bombed hotel buildings and a bridge, while Thailand reported several civilians were injured in a Cambodian rocket attack.

The four deaths on Saturday bring Thailand's total military death toll since Monday to 15, with 270 others injured. It added that six civilians had also been injured.

On Friday, Cambodia said at least 11 civilians had been killed and 59 others injured.

At least 700,000 people have been evacuated on both sides of the border.

Trump had claimed earlier in the week that he could stop the fighting between Thai and Cambodian forces that broke out on Monday just by picking up the phone.

After speaking to both prime ministers on Friday night he wrote on social media that the two countries had agreed to "cease shooting effective this evening" and go back to the agreement they signed in front of the US president in October.

"Both countries are ready for peace," he wrote.

But in their comments after speaking to the US president, neither side mentioned an imminent ceasefire.

Anutin said he told Trump that Thailand was not the aggressor, and that Cambodia must show that it had withdrawn its forces and removed landmines from the border before a ceasefire was possible. "They must show us first," he said.

The Cambodian leadership said they must fight on to protect their country's sovereignty.

There was no mention of the use of tariffs as leverage to force the two sides to disengage, as happened in July.

Thailand has warned the US not to link the conflict to trade.

On Saturday Cambodia reported that it had been struck by more Thai air strikes.

"On December 13, 2025, the Thai military used two F-16 fighter jets to drop seven bombs" on a number of targets, the Cambodian defence ministry said in an X post.

"Thai military aircraft have not stopped bombing yet," it said.

The Thai military also confirmed that fighting continued.

The long-standing border dispute escalated on 24 July, as Cambodia launched a barrage of rockets into Thailand, which responded with air strikes.

Both countries have accused each other of initiating the attacks.

After days of intense fighting which left dozens dead, the neighbouring South East Asian countries agreed to an "immediate and unconditional ceasefire" brokered by Trump and Malaysian Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim. This was formalised at a ceremony in Malaysia in October presided over by the US president.

However, both sides continued to trade accusations of ceasefire violations, with Thailand publishing evidence of Cambodian troops laying landmines, which have caused seven Thai soldiers to lose limbs. Cambodia says the mines are left over from the civil war in the 1980s.

Since then, tensions continued to build.

This week, Thailand launched air strikes inside Cambodia after two of its soldiers were injured in a skirmish last Sunday. Cambodia has responded with rocket barrages. The fighting affected six provinces in north-eastern Thailand and six provinces in Cambodia's north and north-west.

The two countries have been been contesting their 800km land border for more than a century. The border was drawn by French cartographers in 1907, when France was the colonial ruler in Cambodia.
Once again the boom of artillery, rockets and air strikes sounds along the Thai-Cambodian border.

Villages in a corridor stretching for hundreds of kilometres have been evacuated for a second time in five months. Families and their pets sit on mats in temporary shelters, wondering when they can go home, and when they might be forced to flee yet again.

Why has this happened so soon after the ceasefire brokered by US President Donald Trump in July?

It was ignited by a seemingly minor incident on Sunday, when a Thai engineering team working on an access road in the disputed area of the border was, according to the Thai army, fired on by Cambodian troops. Two Thai soldiers were injured, neither seriously.

In the past this might have been settled by some fleet-footed diplomacy. But there has been little of that this year. Instead a yawning gulf of mistrust lies between these two neighbours, one even Trump's deal-making prowess has failed to bridge.

Getty Images A line of people riding down the side of a road on motorcycles, many of them carrying piles of possessionsGetty Images
At least half a million people have been evacuated on both sides of the border as clashes continue
Despite his claim to have struck a historic peace deal, the ceasefire he forced on the two countries in July was always tenuous.

Thailand in particular was very uneasy about internationalising the border conflict, and only agreed to the ceasefire because Trump held a tariff gun to its head; at the time both Thailand and Cambodia were just days away from a deadline to negotiate significantly lower tariff rates on their vital exports to the US.

Cambodia, by contrast, is only too happy to welcome outside intervention. As the smaller country it feels at a disadvantage in bilateral negotiations with Thailand.

But on the border its troops have continued to engage in confrontations with the Thai army, and, in a move guaranteed to anger the Thai public, to lay new land-mines which have so far caused seven Thai soldiers to lose limbs. Thailand has presented compelling evidence of this, accused Cambodia of bad faith, and refused to release 18 of its soldiers captured in July.

US tells Thailand and Cambodia to stop fighting as clashes continue
Thousands flee Thai-Cambodia border after deadly clashes
Thailand suspends Cambodia 'peace deal'
Since July, any restraint there was on the Thai armed forces has gone. The current prime minister Anutin Charvirakul heads a minority coalition, and is beset with other challenges. He has given the military carte blanche to manage the border conflict as it sees fit.

The army has said its goal is to inflict sufficient damage on its Cambodian counterpart to ensure it can never again threaten border communities. It also wants to take control of several hill-top positions which would give its soldiers greater advantage in any future battles with Cambodian forces.

Thailand Cambodia border map
Both sides have been manoeuvring around these positions all year, trying to reinforce roads access and fortifications around them.

The Thais believed they were on track to push the Cambodians back when they were forced to stop in July. The military says it wants to finish the job now.

It also sees its role of defending Thailand's territorial claims as a sacred one, even though this conflict is about tiny slivers of mostly unpopulated land.

Getty Images A pair of hands from a person kneeling on the ground, with the left hand holding a freshly excavated land-mine which still has dirt resting on its top. A shovel on the ground in the side of the shotGetty Images
Cambodia has continued to lay new land-mines in its borderlands with Thailand, causing at least seven Thai soldiers to lose limbs
The motivations at work in the Cambodian leadership are much harder to divine.

Former Prime Minister Hun Sen is still the puppet-master pulling the strings of his son, current PM Hun Manet. Publicly he has appealed for restraint by his troops, portraying Cambodia as being bullied by a more powerful neighbour and in need of international support.

Yet his interventions in this simmering border dispute have been decisive this year, in particular his decision to leak a confidential phone conversation with the then-Thai PM Paetongtarn Shinawatra, whose father Thaksin was a long-standing friend and business partner of Hun Sen's.

Her leaked comments, praising him and condemning her own army commanders for being too gung-ho, were catastrophic for her and her father. Her government collapsed, he has gone to jail, and many Thais, even those bitterly opposed to the Shinawatra family, have been angered by the perception that Cambodia has been meddling in Thai politics.

Thai public opinion is now much more in favour of their army's hard-line approach to Cambodia.

Can President Trump bang heads together again as he did in July? Perhaps.

But if all he achieves is another ceasefire it will only be a matter of time before fighting breaks out again. And Thailand has said repeatedly that it is not yet ready for diplomacy. Cambodia, it says, must show sincerity before it is ready to try for a ceasefire again.

What that means exactly is not clear, but at the very least it would require a decisive and verified end to the use of land-mines on the border.esidents on both sides of Thailand's and Cambodia's border evacuated in droves on Monday as fresh clashes erupted, killing at least five people.

Both sides have each accused the other of starting the violence, which is the most serious confrontation between the two countries since they agreed to a ceasefire in July.

Thailand's Prime Minister Anutin Charnvirakul says his country "never wanted violence" but will "use necessary means to preserve its sovereignty", while Cambodia's former leader Hun Sen accused Thai "invaders" of provoking retaliation.

Since May, escalating tensions between the neighbours have led to more than 40 deaths, as well as import bans and travel restrictions.

Reuters Villagers in the Oddar Meanchey Province, Cambodia fleeing with their belongings on tractors, bikes and vans. We see them from behind as they drive awayReuters
Residents living at the border evacuated the area as fresh clashes erupted on Monday
On Monday, the Thai army said its troops had responded to Cambodian fire in Thailand's Ubon Ratchathani Province, including by launching air strikes along the disputed border; while Phnom Penh's defence ministry said it was the Thai forces that attacked first, in Cambodia's Preah Vihear province.

At least one Thai soldier and four Cambodian civilians have been killed, and about a dozen wounded as a result of Monday's fighting, according to officials on either side.

For Thai teacher Siksaka Pongsuwan, though, there are other, hidden victims of the clashes: the children living near the border, he warns, are "losing opportunities and... precious time" compared to their peers living in relatively peaceful cities.

Children bearing the brunt
Nearly 650 schools across five Thai provinces have been ordered to shut for safety reasons, Thailand's education minister said, following the fresh tensions that have simmered since Sunday.

Meanwhile, videos on social media show chaotic scenes at schools in Cambodia's border provinces as parents rushed to take their children home.

And this is not the first time these children have had their education interrupted in recent months.

Siksaka Pongsuwan Siksaka Pongsuwan says he and his neighbours on the Thai side of the border are torn about whether to evacuateSiksaka Pongsuwan
Siksaka Pongsuwan says he and his neighbours on the Thai side of the border are torn about whether to evacuate
In July, in the midst of the children's examinations, five days of intense fighting broke out between the two nations.

In the aftermath, Pongsuwan's school switched to online classes, but not all students could access them - some lived in households with no internet, while iPads distributed by the schools did not reach everyone.

In Cambodia, former journalist Mech Dara shared several clips of children frantically running out of their schools on his X account.

"How many times [do these] kids have to suffer the shocking environment?" he wrote. "The nonsense fighting bring kids [a] horrible nightmare."

He also shared a picture of a boy, still in his school uniform, having some food in an underground bunker. "Why does the kid and his family have to eat their meal in the bunker...?" he wrote.

Meanwhile, Pongsuwan told the BBC that he and his neighbours are now torn about whether to evacuate - even as gunfire can be heard every now and then in his village.

"If you ask whether we're scared, yes we are... Should we leave? Will it really be safer? Or should we stay?" he tells the BBC.

Where the latest clashes have broken out
A century-old dispute, reignited
The century-old border dispute between the South East Asian nations dramatically escalated with a Cambodian rocket barrage into Thailand on the morning of 24 July, followed by Thai air strikes.

Days later, Bangkok and Phnom Penh agreed to an "immediate and unconditional ceasefire" brokered by Malaysian Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim.

In October, both sides signed a ceasefire agreement during a ceremony with US President Donald Trump in Malaysia. At the time, Trump claimed a historic achievement in ending the border conflict.

But just two weeks after that signing, Thailand said it would suspend the implementation of the agreement, after two of its soldiers were injured in a landmine explosion near the Cambodian border.

Cambodia, which nominated Trump for a Nobel peace prize for his role in brokering the ceasefire, has repeatedly claimed it is committed to the deal.

Thailand and Cambodia have been contesting territorial sovereignty along their 800km land border for more than a century, since the borders of the two nations were drawn after the French occupation of Cambodia.

Additional reporting by Jonathan Head and Koh Ewe


In a royal decree published on Friday, Prime Minister Anutin Charnvirakul cited the deadly border dispute among other challenges his minority government has struggled to contain since it took office three months ago.

"The appropriate solution is to dissolve parliament… which is a way to return political power to the people," he said.

Anutin, a business tycoon, is Thailand's third prime minister since August 2023. When he took power in September, he said he would dissolve parliament by the end of January.

However, now facing an imminent vote of no confidence, Anutin brought the election forward.

Anutin and his Bhumjaithai party were heavily criticised for their handling of serious flooding in southern Thailand last month, which left at least 176 people dead.

The house's dissolution comes during renewed fighting with Cambodia, which has killed at least 20 people and displaced hundreds of thousands.

"The government had executed every means in public administration to quickly resolve the urgent issues overwhelming the country… but running the country requires stability," Anutin wrote in the decree endorsed by Thailand's King Maha Vajiralongkorn.

"As a minority government, together with troubling domestic political circumstances, it has been unable to carry out public administration continuously, effectively and with stability," he wrote.

The dissolution order comes after the prime minister lost the support of the youthful, progressive People's Party - also the largest party in parliament - which had previously backed his premiership.

The People's Party and the pragmatic, conservative Bhumjaithai are ideological opposites.

The opposition bloc's support, however, came with strings attached. It wanted Anutin to start reforms of Thailand's military-drafted constitution and to dissolve the house within four months, among other things.

The People's Party has now accused Bhumjaithai of failing to honour that deal. It had planned to submit a no-confidence motion against the government on Friday, according to Thai media - having already called on the prime minister on Thursday to disband parliament to "show responsibility towards the people".

"See you at the polling stations," the party said in statement on Facebook.

Thailand has been in political turmoil over the past year, with two prime ministers dismissed by the courts.

Anutin's predecessor Paetongtarn Shinawatra was removed for violating ethics, after she was heard calling Cambodia's former leader Hun Sen "uncle" and criticising the Thai army in a leaked phone call.

Srettha Thavisin, the leader before her, was also dismissed for violating ethics, by appointing to his cabinet a former lawyer who was once jailed.

Additional reporting by Jonathan Head in Bangkok