TRAGIC ACCIDENTS:

NEWS 01:

Two men have died after a crash involving a bus in County Fermanagh on Friday evening.

Emergency services attended the crash on the Derrylin Road near Enniskillen at about 19:00 GMT.

A Bus Éireann coach and a Ford Kuga car were involved in the crash. The two men who were in the car were both pronounced dead at the scene.

The Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) said it is has not had any reports of injuries to the driver or passengers of the bus.

The Northern Ireland Ambulance Service (NIAS) said it despatched two rapid response paramedics, two emergency crews and an ambulance officer to the incident.

The Derrylin Road remained closed for some time overnight, but reopened on Saturday morning.

In a statement, Bus Éireann confirmed that one of its Expressway Route 30 services was involved.

The Expressway Route 30 service runs between Dublin and Donegal.

The statement continued: "Bus Éireann and emergency services personnel attended the scene".

"The safety of our passengers, staff and the public is of paramount importance to Bus Éireann. We will provide any assistance required to the relevant authorities."

SDLP Fermanagh and Omagh District councillor Adam Gannon said the incident was a "terrible tragedy".

"My thoughts are immediately with the families impacted and the relatives. People will be grieving today," he said.

Mr Gannon added the road, which is a main road to Dublin, is "not in great condition".

"It's been long waiting an upgrade and hopefully that will come at some stage."

In a statement, Sinn Féin assembly member Jemma Dolan expressed her "shock and sadness".

"This is the latest tragic incident on our roads in recent weeks," she said.

"I want to send my condolences to the victims' families and friends at this time.

"My thoughts are also with those involved in the collision and I also pay tribute to the emergency services who attended the scene"

						NEWS 02

British paratrooper killed in Ukraine 'lived life of courage'
A member of the UK armed forces who died in Ukraine has been named as Lance Corporal George Hooley of the Parachute Regiment.

Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer paid tribute to the 28-year-old paratrooper, saying he had lived a life "full of courage and determination".

"He served our country with honour and distinction around the world in the cause of freedom and democracy, including as part of the small number of British personnel in Ukraine."

The Ministry of Defence (MoD) said he had been killed in a "tragic accident" while observing Ukrainian forces test "a new defensive capability, away from the front lines" on Tuesday.

Speaking in the House of Commons, Sir Keir said he had placed L/Cpl Hooley's name on record "to express our gratitude and respect, and to affirm that his service will never be forgotten".

L/Cpl Hooley had an "incredibly bright" future, his commanding officer said in a tribute on Wednesday.

"I have no doubt that he would have continued to perform at the very front of his peer group over the coming years," the commanding officer said, adding that "all members of the Parachute Regiment mourn his loss".

The 28-year-old's company commander added: "If you met George Hooley, you remembered it. His energy and enthusiasm were simply extraordinary.

"He provided spark that lifted others, a drive that inspired, and a zest for life that reminded us all how to live with purpose and joy. And we loved him for it. George had a rare gift: a deep kindness and genuine time for everyone."

He was "the model of professionalism" and a "born soldier", the company commander added.

"His colleagues will tell you that he wasn't just part of the team, he was the character within it. The glue. The laughter. The calm voice of sense. The soldier who made the hard days easy and the good days memorable."

The paratrooper was due to be promoted to Corporal in January and had been given the role's responsibilities on his deployment to Ukraine, the MoD said.

He had previously been deployed to Afghanistan, Africa and Eastern Europe.

Defence Secretary John Healey shared his condolences with L/Cpl Hooley's family and colleagues.

						NEWS 03

Dozens die in DR Congo mine after makeshift bridge collapses

Rescuers are searching for survivors after a bridge collapsed at a cobalt mine in the Democratic Republic of Congo, killing at least 32 people.

Unauthorised miners forced their way into the southern Kalando mine on Saturday despite being banned from the site, said local official Roy Kaumba Mayonde.

Military personnel guarding the site then reportedly fired guns, causing the bridge to collapse after panicked miners rushed across it, government mining agency SAEMAPE said.

The military has not responded to this allegation.
Such accidents are not uncommon in DR Congo, where around 1.5 to 2 million people work in the unregulated artisanal mining industry, which feeds the global demand for copper, cobalt and other minerals.

Two of the miners injured at Kalando mine, located in the village of Mulondo, sustained bullet wounds, Olivier Kayumba, a journalist who visited the scene on Sunday, said.

Mr Kayumba told the BBC that one miner had been shot in the thigh and the other in the hand.

In his statement, Mayonde said no miners had died from gunshot wounds. However, he did not say whether bullets had caused any non-fatal injuries.

Mayonde called the collapse at the mine "tragic", adding that mining companies in DR Congo were "frequently victims of this type of invasion of their concessions by illegal miners".

The miners had erected the bridge themselves, and the unstable structure was unable to sustain a large number of people making a "hasty" crossing, Mayonde said.

Images circulating on social media, which have not been verified by the BBC, appear to show the lifeless remains of the miners as locals look on in disbelief.

In a statement, Congolese authorities urged artisanal miners to take up the government's offer of alternative training in agribusiness, in an attempt to avoid the recurrence of such tragedies.

DR Congo is the world's largest supplier of cobalt, which has defence and aerospace applications as well as being essential for batteries in electric vehicles.

The process of extracting cobalt in DR Congo has been beset with concerns of child labour, human rights abuses and corruption.

						NEWS 04

Man dies and three injured in helicopter crash
A 70-year-old man has died and three other people have been injured in a helicopter crash in Doncaster, police have confirmed.

Emergency services were called to a field off Ings Lane, Bentley, at about 10:15 GMT.

The pilot, a 41-year-old man, and two other passengers, a 58-year-old woman and a 10-year-old boy, received minor injuries, South Yorkshire Police said.

The aircraft had taken off from Retford Gamston Airport, in Nottinghamshire, shortly before it crashed.

South Yorkshire Police said the older man had died at the scene of the crash "despite the best efforts of medical staff".

"His family is aware and being supported by our officers," they added.

Det Insp Matt Bolger said: "Our thoughts are with the family and loved ones of the man who sadly died in this tragic incident."
South Yorkshire Police and the government's Air Accidents Investigation Branch (AAIB) have launched a joint investigation into the incident.

Det Insp Bolger asked anyone who saw the crash or had information about the incident to contact officers.

"We are particularly keen to hear from those with footage of the helicopter leading up to the crash," he added.

The road remains closed and officers and emergency services are also still at the scene.

Retford Gamston Airport said in a short statement: "We can confirm an aircraft based here, operated by an onsite tenant, has been involved in an incident.

"We've no further information at this time."
	
						NEWS 05
Spain and Portugal fires kill two more as Spanish troops battle blazes
Spain has sent 500 more troops to fight raging wildfires, bringing the total deployed to 1,900, as the death toll from the blazes has risen to four.

On Sunday, a firefighter died after an accident during firefighting efforts when his truck fell down a steep hill, the Castile and León regional government said.

Spain's Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez expressed "sadness" and "desolation" on X at the latest death.

In neighbouring Portugal, where fires are also blazing, another firefighter was killed on Sunday in a "tragic" traffic accident, President Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa said.

Fires have also broken out in Greece, France, Turkey and the Balkans as a heatwave has scorched swathes of southern Europe.

Several large fires are still burning in the northwest and west of Spain, where 27,000 residents are currently evacuated from their homes.

Castile and León is the most affected area, with local media station Radio 5 reporting on Monday that the air is "unbreathable" due to the smoke.

A fire in the western province of Cáceres is also still out of control and has burned 11,000 hectares (27,181 acres).

Twelve fires are burning in the north-west region of Galicia, most in the province of Ourense, with the largest having burned 17,500 hectares.

Fires on Sunday left at least five people injured in Castile and León, with four of them in critical condition.

Last week, two volunteers died fighting fires in Leon. Another man died in Tres Cantos, near Madrid, after a fire broke out.

This year alone, about 343,000 hectares have burned across Spain, according to the European Forest Fire Information System (EFFIS) - close to double the amount from the previous year.

Over the weekend, Spain's Civil Guard said they have proposed "sanctions" on four people for carrying out unauthorised burns in A Coruña in the Galicia region.

Causing a wildfire is a criminal offence in Spain, even if accidental.

						NEWS 06
Ex-RAF test pilot says Chinook crashed on 'show flight'
A Chinook helicopter that crashed in Scotland more than 30 years ago, killing 29 people, was being flown as a "show flight" after safety concerns were raised about its airworthiness, a former RAF test pilot has said.

Four crew and 25 passengers were killed when RAF Chinook ZD576 struck a hillside in foggy conditions over the Mull of Kintyre in 1994.

Retired Squadron Leader Robert Burke said the Mark 2 version of the Chinook had been chosen to demonstrate to the Army that a recent upgrade from the Mark 1 version was safe.

The Ministry of Defence (MoD) said it sympathised with relatives of those killed but insisted the circumstances of the crash had already been thoroughly investigated.

The former test pilot said he believed that internal politics between the Army and RAF might have influenced the decision to use the Mark 2 aircraft.

Many of the passengers who died were senior members of the security services who were travelling from RAF Aldergrove in Northern Ireland to Fort George near Inverness, for a conference believed to be about the Troubles in Northern Ireland.

"The reason why that aircraft was flown in spite of all the reservations, and indeed the request from one of the dead pilots at the time, was to show the Army that the Chinook programme was running on time and the Mark 2 was perfectly safe to go into service," he said.

"It was a show flight. This journey - from airfield to airfield - was a perfect opportunity to fly such a high-profile group in an RAF Hercules for instance.

"Not in a helicopter about which there were so many concerns. It was a gesture, that flight. A reckless act, but a show flight - it's as simple, and utterly tragic, as that."

It was previously revealed that the pilots had requested to fly a Mark 1 version of the Chinook or two Puma helicopters which were on stand-by.

It has also been revealed that files relating to the crash will not be made public for 100 years.

						NEWS 07
Family 'shocked' at Edinburgh tram death safety failings
The family of a man killed by a tram have said they are "shocked" by the safety failings identified by rail investigators.

Carlos Correa, 53, died last year after being hit while crossing a tram line in the Saughton area of the city.

A Rail Accident Investigation Branch (RAIB) report has recommended a review of all off-street pedestrian crossings on the line.

Investigators had previously warned the tram horns were not loud enough.

The RAIB report stated that Mr Correa, a bus driver, was seemingly unaware that the tram was approaching when he walked onto the crossing and that his visibility was reduced by shrubs and trees alongside the line near the Saughton tram stop,
Speaking on behalf of Mr Correa's family, Jayne Crawford, of Thompsons Solicitors, said: "The family, who are still grieving their loss, are shocked by a damning report prepared by the RAIB identifying several areas of failings in respect of public safety.

"Even the most basic risk assessment and investigation would have identified appropriate safety measures, any one of which could have prevented Mr Correa's death.

"In essence, the report suggests that in the many millions of public funds lavished on the Edinburgh's tram project, little attention was paid to simple, industry standard, safety measures.


						NEWS 08
Pendle boy, 4, dies in 'tragic farm accident'
A four-year-old boy has died in "a tragic accident" on the farm where he lived.

Lancashire Police said Harry Lee was killed when he fell from a vehicle and was struck by a telehandler on Monday.

His death in Well Head Road, Newchurch-in-Pendle, is not being treated as suspicious.

Harry's family said he was the "light of our lives" who "never failed to melt hearts wherever he went, with his cheeky smile and laughter".

They added: "Harry was born and brought up on a farm and loved the outdoor lifestyle. His passion was tractors and animals.

"He could name every brand and type of tractor in the area by sight and loved to feed and look after the animals.

"Harry was our angel and although it is the most difficult time of our lives, trying to come to terms with his loss, he will always be with us and we will think of him every day for the rest of our lives."

						NEWS 09
University of Essex student died after taking ecstasy
he death of a University of Essex student who took ecstasy has been ruled "a tragic accident".

Alexander Chauvin, 20, died on 14 January after attending a house party in Colchester with friends.

An inquest at Essex Coroner's Court heard there were no suspicious circumstances surrounding the death of the computer science student.

Coroner Caroline Beasley-Murray, said it was "more likely than not" that Mr Chauvin's death was accidental.

She also praised his family, who attended the inquest in Chelmsford, for acting with "the utmost dignity".

'Kind and caring'
Mr Chauvin, who suffered from epilepsy, was found "seriously unwell" at a party he attended with around nine other students on 13 January.

An ambulance was called but the student, from Tonbridge, Kent, was pronounced dead at 00:36 BST the following morning.

						NEWS 10
Dad ran over three-year-old son in 'tragic' farm accident
A three-year-old boy was accidentally killed falling from a Land Rover being driven by his father, an inquest has found.

Evan Lloyd Williams fell on a farm near Llanybydder in Camarthenshire and died on 21 October 2018.

The car door is thought to have opened while his father was reversing causing Evan to fall on the ground and tests showed he died from head injuries.

Coroner Mark Layton described Evan's death as a "terrible tragedy".

'Beautiful nature'
Evan's father Dewi Williams, from Gorsgoch in Ceredigion, had been reversing down a steep incline around a bend, with his wife Sian Elin Williams standing on the left hand side - following the correct procedure for a difficult manoeuvre, the inquest heard.

The Land Rover was not fitted with any restraint mechanisms and Evan's sister was also in the back of the vehicle with him.

Sgt Shane Davies from Dyfed-Powys Police said it appeared Evan had fallen on the ground and then been run over, causing catastrophic injuries.

						NEWS 11
Nigeria boat accident kills at least 76 fleeing floodwater in Anambra
10 October 2022

At least 76 people have been reported dead after a boat accident in Nigeria's south-eastern state of Anambra.

The boat, which was carrying at least 80 people, capsized on Friday in the Ogbaru area in Anambra state.

Most of the victims were women and children, trying to reach safety after their community had been inundated by floodwater.

Benard Achonu told the BBC he was devastated: "My life has fallen apart," he said.

The 60-year-old lost his wife and all three of his children, aged between two and six. They were among those fleeing floodwaters in the area, he said.

Another former resident, Precious Umeh, told BBC Pidgin that the situation was extremely bad. "Some people whose family members have died in the boat accident are wondering how to bury the bodies because there is no dry land in their area."

President Muhammadu Buhari offered his condolences to the families of the victims in the "tragic" accident.

						NEWS 12

Violeta Mitul: Moldova international dies in 'tragic accident' aged 26

Moldova international Violeta Mitul has died aged 26 after a "tragic accident while on a mountain hike with club-mates".

The defender joined Einherji in Iceland in the spring and her club and Uefa said she passed away, external earlier this week.

A statement from Einherji added Mitul "was kind, energetic and an exemplary footballer".

Mitul, who had previously played for Apulia Trani in Italy and La Solana in Spain, earned 40 caps for Moldova.

The Moldovan FA called Mitul "one of the best players of the women's national team".

Moldova are ranked the 114th best side in women's international football by Fifa and did not qualify for the World Cup.

Mitul also won the Moldovan Cup with Alga Tiraspol and Romanian Cup with Vasas Femina.
						NEWS 13

Paraglider died in 'tragic' Peak District landing accident
An experienced paraglider died after the wind suddenly changed as he prepared to land, an inquest has heard.

Tim Ogden was out with friends near Mam Tor in the Peak District, Derbyshire, when he encountered turbulence in the air on 14 August last year.

Chesterfield Coroner's Court heard he died at the scene from chest injuries suffered on impact.

The 53-year-old, who was a retired IT manager, was described as "a real rock" to his family.
The inquest heard Mr Ogden - who was born in Radcliffe, Greater Manchester, but lived in Sheffield - had been a keen participant in many sports, including skiing and scuba diving, and was active in a number of associations over the years.

He was a member of Derbyshire Soaring Club, where he had progressed to coach other members, and he was known as a safe and "thorough" flyer.

On the day of his death, he was out flying with Guy Richardson and Andrew Tillsley.

In a statement Mr Richardson said he went to land once the winds picked up to about 30mph (48km/h).

He said he suffered a "60% asymmetric collapse" to the left side of his wing as the wind changed direction while landing at Windy Knoll.
					
						NEWS 14

Pakistan criticises 'unjustified' US drone strikes
Pakistan has said that US drone strikes in the north-west have "neither justification nor understanding".

Foreign Ministry spokesman Abdul Basit said such attacks were counter-productive and a violation of his country's sovereignty.

More than 150 people, militants and civilians, have died in drone strikes over the last month.

Correspondents say that the attacks have fuelled anti-American sentiment at a time when tensions are already high.

On Thursday, there was a new US drone attack in Mir Ali, Khaisora district, North Waziristan, in which four people were killed, including two foreigners.

Pakistan shut the key Torkham border-crossing last week because of a Nato air-strike which killed at least two soldiers.

The US has now apologised for the attack, while insisting that its war effort in Afghanistan has not been impeded by the move.

An estimated 6,500 oil tankers and other supply vehicles are still waiting for the crossing to reopen. In the latest attacks blamed on militants, at least 40 tankers carrying fuel for Nato were destroyed on Wednesday.
